.\" -*- mode: troff; coding: UTF-8 -*-
.\"TOPICS "ЗМІСТ:"
.TH MC 1 "червня 2025" "Версія MC 4.8.33" "GNU Midnight Commander"
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH "НАЗВА"
mc \- Візуальний фаловий менеджер для Unix\-подібних систем.
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH "ВИКОРИСТАННЯ"
.B mc
[\-abcCdfhPstuUVx] [\-l log] [dir1 [dir2]] [\-e [file] ...] [\-v file]
.\"NODE "DESCRIPTION"
.SH "ОПИС"
GNU Midnight Commander це класичний двопанельний файловий менеджер 
для Unix\-подібних операційних систем.
.\"NODE "OPTIONS"
.\"DONT_SPLIT"
.SH "ОПЦІЇ"
.TP
.I \-a, \-\-stickchars
Не використовувати графічні символи для малювання ліній.
.TP
.I \-b, \-\-nocolor
Використовувати монохромний режим
.TP
.I \-c, \-\-color
Використовувати кольоровий режим, передивіться, будь ласка, розділ
.\"LINK2"
Кольори
.\"Colors"
для інформації про використання кольорів та кольорових схем.
.TP
.I \-C arg, \-\-colors=arg
Визначення кольрової схеми у командному рядку. Формат переметрів
описаний у розділі
.\"LINK2"
Кольори
.\"Colors"

.TP
.I \-\-configure\-options
Показує опції визначені під час компіляції MC
.TP
.I \-d, \-\-nomouse
Відключення підтримки миши.
.TP
.I \-e [file], \-\-edit[=file]
Запуск вбудованого редактора. Якщо зазначено файл, відкрити його.
Дивись також
.BR "mcedit (1)" .
.TP
.I \-f, \-\-datadir
Показати визначений при компіляції шлях для пошуку файлів Midnight Commander.
.TP
.I \-F, \-\-datadir\-info
Показати розширену інформації про визначені при компіляції шляхі для
Midnight Commander.
.TP
.I \-g, \-\-oldmouse
Встановлює режим миши "normal tracking". Використовується для роботи на
xterm\-сумісних терміналах (tmux/screen).
.TP
.I \-k, \-\-resetsoft
Скидання програмних клавіш до їх значень за замовченням визначеним в базі даних termcap/terminfo. 
Використовується тільки на терміналах HP коли функціональні клавіші не працюють.
.TP
.I \-K file, \-\-keymap=file
Визначення назви файлу для прив'язки комбінації клавіш до визначених дій.
.TP
.I \-l file, \-\-ftplog=file
Визначає файл для збереження налаштувань сервера з діалогу ftpfs
.TP
.I \-\-nokeymap
Не завантажувати комбінації клавіш з будь якого файлу. Використовувати визначені у програмі.
.TP
.I \-P file, \-\-printwd=file
Запис останнього робочого каталогу у визначений файл. Ця опцію не передбачена
для безпосереднього використання, вона використовується зі спеціального скрипта
якій автоматично змінює активний каталог оболонкі на останній каталог з якім 
працював Midnight Commander. Код у файлі
.B /home/roman/out/libexec/mc/mc.sh
(для користувачів bash та zsh) або
.B /home/roman/out/libexec/mc.csh
(для користувачів tcsh), визначає
.B mc
як псевдонім для відповідного скрипта оболонкі.
.TP
.I \-s, \-\-slow
Включає режим повільного терміналу. У цьому режимі командер не використовує
псефдографіку та не виводить розширені повідомлення.
.TP
.I \-S arg, \-\-skin=arg
Визначає назву кольорової схеми у командному рядку. Використання кольрових схем
описано у розділі
.\"LINK2"
Кольрові схеми
.\"Skins"

.TP
.I \-t, \-\-termcap
Використовується тількі якщо програму скомпільовано з S\-Lang та terminfo: це дозволяє
Midnight Commander використовувати значення змінної
.B TERMCAP
для отримання інформації про термінал а не інформації із системної бази даних терміналів.
.TP
.I \-u, \-\-nosubshell
Відключає використання альтернативних оболонок (має сенс лише у випадку,
коли Midnight Commander скомпільовано з підтримкою subshell).
.TP
.I \-U, \-\-subshell
Включає використання альтернативних оболонок (має сенс лише у випадку,
коли Midnight Commander скомпільовано з subshell як опцією).
.TP
.I \-v file, \-\-view=file
Запуск вбудованого переглядача для перегляду зазначеного файлу.
Також дивіться
.BR "mcview (1)" .
.TP
.I \-V, \-\-version
Вивід версії програми
.TP
.I \-x, \-\-xterm
Примусовий режим xterm. Використовується у випадках роботи на xterm\-сумісних
терміналах (2 екранних режими, та можливість посилати escape послідовності мишкою).
.TP
.I \-X, \-\-no\-x11
Не використовувати Х11 для отримання стану модифікаторів Alt, Ctrl, Shift
.PP
Якщо зазначено 2 шляхі \- перший вказує на каталог, якій буде показано в активній
панелі; другій \- каталог що буде показано у іншій панелі.
.PP
Якщо зазначено 1 шлях, його буде показано в активній
панелі; каталог що буде показано у іншій панелі визначається значенням змінної
"other_dir" з файлу panels.ini.
.PP
Якщо шлях не зазначено, в активній панелі буде відкрито чинний каталог; 
каталог що буде показано у іншій панелі визначається значенням змінної
"other_dir" з файлу panels.ini.
.\"NODE "Overview"
.SH "Огляд"
Екран Midnight Commander поділено на чотири частини.
Майже весь екранний простір займають дві панелі каталогів.
За замовченням, друга строка знизу екрана \- командний рядок оболонкі,
нижня строка показує функціональні клавіши.
Верхня строка екрану -\
.\"LINK2"
стрічка меню\&.
.\"Menu Bar"
Меню може бути прихованим, але з'являється коли ви клікаєте мишкою
на верхній стрічці екрану, або натискаєте клавішу F9.
.PP
Midnight Commander дозволяє бачити зміст двох каталогів одночасно на двох
панелях. Одна з панелей - активна (в ній підсвічується назва файлу або каталогу).
Практично всі операції з каталогами або файлами здійснюються в активній панелі.
Деякі операції, такі як перейменування або копіювання, за звичай використовють
неактивну панель як кінцевий результат операції, але спочатку завжди
запитують підтвердження. Для більш детальної інформації дивіться розділи
.\"LINK2"
панелі каталогів\&,
.\"Directory Panels"
,
.\"LINK2"
ліве та праве меню
.\"Left and Right Menus"
та
.\"LINK2"
меню Файл\&.
.\"File Menu"
.PP
Ви можете запускати системні команди з Midnight Commander, просто набравши
їх. Все що ви набираєте, потрапляє у командний рядок та коли ви натискаєте
Enter, Midnight Commander виконує набрану вами команду. Дивіться
.\"LINK2"
Командний рядок оболонкі
.\"Shell Command Line"
та
.\"LINK2"
клавіши поля вводу
.\"Input Line Keys"
для більш детального опису командного рядку оболонкі.
.PP
Майже всі операції з 
.B файлами
які описані у цьому керівництві, стосуються і
.B каталогів

.\"NODE "Mouse Support"
.SH "Підтримка мишкі"
Midnight Commander підтримує роботу з мишкою. Мишка підтримується завжди
коли ви працюєте у терміналі
.B xterm(1)
, вона працює навіть при використанні telnet, ssh або rlogin з'єднання
з іншою машиною, або коли ви користуєтесь консолью Linux та маєте працюючий
.B gpm
сервер.
.PP
Коли ви клікаєте лівою кнопкою на файлі, ви вибираєте цей файл; правою кнопкою \-
файл помічається (або помітка знімається, залежно від попереднього стану).
.PP
Подійне кліканьє на файлі спробує виконати цей файл, якщо він є програмою. 
Якщо є відповідний застосунок для відкриття файлу за його
.\"LINK2"
розширенням
.\"Edit Extension File"
, файл відкриється у цьому застосунку.
.PP
Також кліком можна запустити програми, прив'язаниі до функціональних клавіш.
.PP
Типове значення автоповтору для клавіш мишкі \- 400 мілісекунд.
Значення можна коригувати, міняючі змінну
.I mouse_repeat_rate
у файлі
.\"LINK2"
\&~/.config/mc/ini
.\"Save Setup"
.PP
Якщо ви працюєте у Midnight Commander з підтримкою мишкі, ви можете копіювати 
та вставляти текст натиснувши клавішу Shift.
.SH ""
.\"NODE "Keys"
.SH "Клавіши та комбінації"
Деякі команди у Midnight Commander використовуються у комбінації з клавішами
.I Control
(іноді позначається CTRL або CTL) та
.I Meta
(іноді позначають ALT або Compose). Ми будемо користуватися наступними позначками:
.TP
.B C\-<chr>
означає натиснути одночасно Control та <chr>.
Так, C\-f це: натиснути Control та натиснути f.
.TP
.B Alt\-<chr>
означає натиснути одночасно Meta або Alt та <chr>.
Якщо на клавіатурі немає клавіши Meta або Alt, натисніть
.IR Esc ,
відпустіть її, потім натисніть <chr>.
.TP
.B S\-<chr>
означає тримати натиснутим Shift, та набрати <chr>.
.PP
Всі поля вводу у Midnight Commander використовують комбінації клавіш
наближень до редактору GNU Emacs (за замовченням).
.PP
Ви можете переназначити комбінації клавіш. Більш детально про це дивіться у розділі
.\"LINK2"
.I як переназначити клавіатурні скорочення
.\"Keys_redefine"
.PP
Решта клавіатурних скорочень (описані у цьому керівництві) мають типову поведінку.
.PP
Є бегето розділів які описують використання клвіш. Найважливіші з них:
.PP
.\"LINK2"
Меню Файл
.\"File Menu"
описує клавіші які використовуються у меню Файл.
Цей розділ включає функціональні клавіші. Більшість цих команд
виконає деякі дії, зазвичай з вибраним, або поміченим файлом.
.PP
Розділ
.\"LINK2"
панели каталогів
.\"Directory Panels"
перелічує клавіші які вибирають або помічають файли як результат наступних дій, якими
зазвичай є дії, що знаходяться у меню файл.
.PP
.\"LINK2"
Командний рядок
.\"Shell Command Line"
містить перелік клавіш, які використовуються для введення та редагування
командного рядку. Більшість з них копіює назву файлу з панелі каталога до
командного рядка для уникнення помилок під час набору, або надають доступ до
історії командного рядку.
.PP
.\"LINK2"
Клавіші введення
.\"Input Line Keys"
використовуються для редагування строкі введення як для командної стрічкі,
так і для полів вводу у діалогових вікнах.
.\"NODE "  Keys_redefine"
.SH "  Перевизначення клавіатурних скорочень"
Клавіатурні скорочення можуть считуватись із зовнішнього файлу (keymap\-файл).
На початку роботи Midnight Commander створює кобінації клавіш які визначені у
коді програми. Потім, завди завантажуються два файли
.B /home/roman/out/share/mc/mc.keymap
та
.B /home/roman/out/etc/mc/mc.keymap
, послідовно перевизначаючі клавіатурні скорочення, які було визначено раніше.
Кeymap\-файли визначені користувачем шукаються за наступною схемою (до першого 
знайденого):
.IP
.br
1) опції передані у командному рядку
.B \-K <keymap>
or
.B \-\-keymap=<keymap>
.br
2) Змінна оточення
.B MC_KEYMAP
.br
3) Параметр
.B keymap
у розділі
.B [Midnight\-Commander]
файлу конфігурації.
.br
4) Файл
.B ~/.config/mc/mc.keymap
.br
.PP
Опції командного рядку, змінна оточення та параметр у файлі конфігурації
можуть містити абсолютний шлях до keymap\-файлу (з розширенням \.keymap
або без). Пошук keymap\-файлу здійснюється у (до першого знайденого):
.IP
.br
1)
.B ~/.config/mc
.br
2)
.B /home/roman/out/etc/mc/
.br
3)
.B /home/roman/out/share/mc/

.\"NODE "  Miscellaneous Keys"
.SH "  Різноманітні клавіші"
Нижче перелічені клавіші, які не попадають ні в яку категорію:
.TP
.B Enter
Якщо у командному рядку є якійсь текст, запускається ця команда.
Якщо команний рядок порожній та на панелі вибрано каталог, Midnight Commander 
зробить 
.B chdir(2)
у цей каталог та оновить інформацію у панелі; якщо вибрано виконуваний файл, 
його буде виконано. На останок, якщо розширення вибраного файлу відповідає
одному з розширень у 
.\"LINK2"
файлі розширень
.\"Edit Extension File"
\- запуститься відповідна програма.
.TP
.B C\-l
оновити всю інформацію у Midnight Commander.
.TP
.B C\-x c
відкриває діалог
.\"LINK2"
Доступ до файлу
.\"Chmod"
для файла, або для помічених файлів.
.TP
.B C\-x o
Відкриває діалог
.\"LINK2"
Зміна власника
.\"Chown"
для файла, або для помічених файлів.
.TP
.B C\-x l
відкриває діалог жорсткого посилання.
.TP
.B C\-x s
відкриває діалог абсолютного символічного посилання.
.TP
.B C\-x v
відкриває діалог відносного символічного посилання.
Дивіться розділ
.\"LINK2"
файлове меню
.\"File Menu"
для поглибленої інформацію щодо символічних посилань.
.TP
.B C\-x i
переключає неактивну панель у режим інформації.
.TP
.B C\-x q
переключає неактивну панель у режим швидкого перегляду.
.TP
.B C\-x !
запускає програму
.\"LINK2"
зовнішньої панелізації
.\"External panelize"
.TP
.B C\-x h
виконує команду
.\"LINK2"
додати каталог до списку швидкого доступу
.\"Hotlist"
.TP
.B Alt\-!
виконує команду "Фільтрований перегляд", описаний у розділі
.\"LINK2"
вбудований переглядач файлов\&.
.\"Internal File Viewer"
.TP
.B Alt\-?
запускає команду
.\"LINK2"
Пошук файлів
.\"Find File"

.TP
.B Alt\-c
відкриває діалог
.\"LINK2"
швидка зміна каталогу
.\"Quick cd"
.TP
.B C\-o
коли програма працює у консолі Linux або FreeBSD, або у емуляторі терміналу,
показує вивід попередньої команди. Коли рпацює у консолі Linux, Midnight 
Commander використовує зовнішню програму (cons.saver) для кєрування збереженням
та відновленням інфорсвції на екрані.
.PP
Якщо Midnight Commander зібрано із підтримкою subshell, ви можете використовувати 
.I C\-o
в любий час, щоб повернутися до головного вікна Midnight Commander, для повернення у виконувану програму знову наберіть 
.I C\-o

Якщо ви призупинили виконання програми завдякі цьому трюкові, ви не зможете
запустити іншу програму з Midnight Commander докі ві не закінчите роботу
призупининої програми.
.\"NODE "  Directory Panels"
.SH "  Панелі каталогів"
Цей розділ містить кобінації які використовуються для роботи з панелями каталогів.
Для зміни зовнішнього вигляду панелів, дивіться розділ
.\"LINK2"
Ліве та Праве Меню\&.
.\"Left and Right Menus"
.TP
.B Tab, C\-i
зміна робочої панелі. Неактивна панель стає активною, активна \- неактивною.
Курсор вибору переходить на нову активну панель.
.TP
.B Insert, C\-t
помітка файлів. Для зняття поміткі, натисніть комбінацію на поміченому файлі.
.TP
.B Alt\-e
для зміни кодової сторінки панелі використовуйте Alt\-e (M\-e).
Перекодування здійснюється з вибраної кодової сторінки у системну.
Для відміни перекодування, виберіть "Без перекодування".
.TP
.B Alt\-g, Alt\-r, Alt\-j
використовуються для вибору верхнього, середнього та нижнього файлу на панелі.
.TP
.B Alt\-t
перемикання режиму перегляду панелі.
Завдякі цьому можна швидко перемикати режими мі скороченим списком,
розширеним списком, форматом списку, визначеним користувачем, та повертатися
до типового вигляду.
.TP
.B C\-\\\\ (control\-backslash)
відкриває діалог
.\"LINK2"
Список каталогів
.\"Hotlist"
та змінює каталог на вибраний зі списку.
.TP
.B + \ (plus)
виділення групи файлів. Midnight Commander відкрие діалог для опції виділення.
Якщо ввімнено перемикач 
.I Тільки файли
, вибиратимуться тільки файли.  Інакше вибиратимуться файли та каталогі.
Якщо ввімнено перемикач 
.I Використання шаблону оболонки
, для виділення можна використовувати шаблони оболонкі (* визначає нуль або будь яку 
кількість любих символів та ? вищначає один буль якій символ). Інакше, для
виділення файлів можна використовувати звичайні регулярні вирази (дивись ed(1)).
Коли вимкнений перемикач
.I Регістрозалежний
, регістр символів буде ігноруватися.
.TP
.B \\\\ (backslash)
використовуйте "\\" для відміни виділення групи файлів. 
.TP
.B up\-key, C\-p
переміщує курсор на попередній елемент списку у панелі.
.TP
.B down\-key, C\-n
переміщує курсор на наступний елемент списку у панелі.
.TP
.B home, a1, Alt\-<
переміщує курсор на перший елемент списку у панелі.
.TP
.B end, c1, Alt\->
переміщує курсор на останній елемент списку у панелі.
.TP
.B next\-page, C\-v
переміщує курсор в панелі на один екран донизу.
.TP
.B prev\-page, Alt\-v
переміщує курсор в панелі на один екран вгору.
.TP
.B Alt\-o
Якщо виділений елемент списку \- каталог, завантажує вміст каталогу до
неактивної панелі та переміщує курсор до наступного елементу. Якщо 
виділений елемент \- файл, завантажує вміст батьківского каталогу до 
неактивної панелі та переміщує курсор до наступного елементу.
.TP
.B Alt\-i
відкриває робочій каталог активної панелі на неактивній панелі. Переводе
неактивну панель у режим списку файлів, якщо треба. 
.TP
.B C\-PageUp, C\-PageDown
тількі якщо підтримується терміналом: переходить до батьківського каталогу (..)
та до вибраного каталогу.
.TP
.B Alt\-y
переміщується до попереднього каталогу у історії, аналогічно до кліку 
мишкою на 
.I <\

.TP
.B Alt\-u
переміщується до нступного каталогу у історії, аналогічно до кліку 
мишкою на 
.I >

.TP
.B Alt\-S\-h, Alt\-H
відкриває історію каталогів.
.\"NODE "  Quick search"
.SH "  Швидкій пошук"
Режим швидкого пошуку дозволяє здійснювати швидкій пошук файлів у файловій панелі.
Натисніть
.I C\-s
або
.I Alt\-s
для початку пошуку назви файлу у файловій панелі.
.P
Коли пошук активний, все що вводить користувач додається до пошукової стрічкі
а не до командного рядку. Якщо активна опція
.I Показувати mini\-status
\, стрічка пошуку відображається у рядку mini\-status. 
Під час набору курсор панелі переходить до файлу якій починається з набраних літер.
Клавіши
.I Backspace
або
.I DEL
використовуються для коригування помилок. Якщо натиснути 
.I C\-s
знову,
курсор перейде до наступної співпадаючої назви.
.P
Якщо розпочати швидкій пошук натиснувши 
.I C\-s
двічі, 
попередня строка пошуку буде використовуватися для нового пошуку.
.P
Разом із звичайними літерами, ви можете використовувати шаблони '*' та '?'.
.\"NODE "  Shell Command Line"
.SH "  Командний рядок"
Цей розділ містить список клавіш, які використовуться задля уникнення
надмірного набору під час введення команд оболонкі.
.TP
.B Alt\-Enter
копіює назву виділеного файлу до командного рядку.
.TP
.B C\-Enter
те саме що і Alt\-Enter. Може не працювати на віддалених системах
та деякіх терміналах.
.TP
.B C\-S\-Enter
копіює повне ім'я, включаючі шлях, виділеного файлу до командного радку.
Може не працювати на віддалених системах
та деякіх терміналах.
.TP
.B Alt\-Tab
здійснює 
.\"LINK2"
доповнення
.\"Completion"
назви файлу, команди, змінної, ім'я користувача та hostname для вас.
.TP
.B C\-x t, C\-x C\-t
копіює помічені файли (або вибраний файл, якщо немає помічених) з активної
панелі (C\-x t) або неактивної панелі (C\-x C\-t) до командного радку.
.TP
.B C\-x p, C\-x C\-p
Перша комбінація копіює шлях з активної панелі до командного рядку,
друга \- шлях з неактивної панелі.
.TP
.B C\-q
комбінація для екранування символів, які зазвичай використовуються
Midnight Commander (наприклад, символ '+')
.TP
.B Alt\-p, Alt\-n
використовуйте ці комбінації для перегляду історії командного радка.
Alt\-p виводить останню команду, Alt\-n \- наступну.
.TP
.B Alt\-h
відкриває вікно з історією поля вводу.
.\"NODE "  General Movement Keys"
.SH "  Основні клавіши для навігації"
Переглядач допомогі, переглядач файлів та дерева каталогів використовують
загальний механізм для навігації. Всі вони використовують одні й
ті самі комбінації клавіш. Звичайно, кожний з них також має власні комбінації клавіш.
.PP
Основні клавіатурні скорочення працюють майжк скрізь у Midnight Commander.
.TP
.B Up, C\-p
переміщення на одну позицію назад.
.TP
.B Down, C\-n
переміщення на одну позицію вперед.
.TP
.B Prev Page, Page Up, Alt\-v
переміщення на сторінку назад.
.TP
.B Next Page, Page Down, C\-v
переміщення на сторінку вперед.
.TP
.B Home, A1
переміщення на початок.
.TP
.B End, C1
переміщення у кінець.
.PP
Переглядач допомогі та переглядач файлів сприймають наступні комбінації
клавіш у доповнення до зазначених вищє:
.TP
.B b, C\-b, C\-h, Backspace, Delete
переміщення на сторінку назад.
.TP
.B Space bar
переміщення на сторінку вперед.
.TP
.B u, d
переміщення на пів сторінки назад або вперед.
.TP
.B g, G
переміщення на початок, або у кінець.
.\"NODE "  Input Line Keys"
.SH "  Комбінації клавіш для полів введення"
Поля вводу використовуються у 
.\"LINK2"
командному рядку
.\"Shell Command Line"
та у діалогових вікнах. Вони розпізнають наступні клавіатурні скорочення:
.TP
.B C\-a
переміщує курсор на початок строкі.
.TP
.B C\-e
переміщує курсор в кінець строкі.
.TP
.B C\-b, move\-left
переміщує курсор на один символ назад.
.TP
.B C\-f, move\-right
переміщує курсор на один символ вперед.
.TP
.B Alt\-f
переміщує курсор на одне слово вперед.
.TP
.B Alt\-b
переміщує курсор на одне слово назад.
.TP
.B C\-h, Backspace
видаляє попередній символ.
.TP
.B C\-d, Delete
видаляє символ над курсором.
.TP
.B C\-@
встановлює помітку для вирізання.
.TP
.B C\-w
копіює текст між курсором і встановленою поміткою у буфер, 
та видаляє його
.TP
.B Alt\-w
копіює текст між курсором і встановленою поміткою у буфер. 
.TP
.B C\-y
всавляє вміст буфера.
.TP
.B C\-k
видаляє текст від позиції курсора до кінця строки.
.TP
.B Alt\-p, Alt\-n
Використовуйте ці комбінації для перегляду історії команд. Alt\-p 
перемістить вас у кінець історії, Alt\-n на один елемент вперед..
.TP
.B Alt\-C\-h, Alt\-Backspace
видаляє одне попереднє
.TP
.B Alt\-Tab
здійснює 
.\"LINK2"
доповнення
.\"Completion"
назви файлу, команди, змінної, ім'я користувача та hostname для вас.
.SH ""
.\"NODE "Menu Bar"
.SH "Меню"
Стрічка меню активується коли ви натискаєте клавішу F9, або клікаєте
мишкою на верхньому рядку екрану. Меню має п'ять пунктів: "Ліва панель",
"Файл", "Команда", "Параметри" та "Права панель".
.PP
.\"LINK2"
Ліва та Права панель
.\"Left and Right Menus"
дозволяє змінювати вигляд лівої та правої файлових панелей.
.PP
.\"LINK2"
Файл
.\"File Menu"
містить перелік дій, які можна виконати для вибраного файлу, або для
помічених файлів.
.PP
.\"LINK2"
Команда
.\"Command Menu"
містить перелік більш загальних дій, не пов'язаних до вибраного
файлу, або помічених файлів.
.PP
.\"LINK2"
Параметри
.\"Options Menu"
містить команди, що дозволяють налаштувати Midnight Commander.
.\"NODE "  Left and Right Menus"
.SH "  Ліва та права файлові панелі (Верхня та Нижня)"
Вигляд файлових панелей може бути змінений у меню
.B "Ліва панель"
та
.B "Права панель"
(вони мають назву
.B Верхня
та
.B Нижня
коли панелі розташовано горизонтально)

Тут і далі біля назви команди меню у дужках буде наведено клавіатурне скорочення для швидкого виконання команди, якщо воно є.

.\"NODE "    Listing Format..."
.SH "    Формат списку..."
Режим перегляду використовується для виводу списку файлів. Доступні чотири різних формата:
.BR Повниї ,
.BR Короткій ,
.BR Розширений
та
.BR "Визначений користувачем".
.PP
Повний режим показує назву файлу, розмір та час модифікації.
.PP
Короткій режим перегляду показує тількі назву файлу та може мати від 1 до
9 колонок (завдякі чому показує більше файлів нвж інші режими).
.PP
Розширений режим подібний до виводу команди
.B "ls \-l" .
Розширений режим займає весь екран.
.PP
Якщо вибрати формат
.I "Визначений користувачем" ,
можна визначити формат виводу.
.PP
Формат має починатися з визначення розміру панелі. Вона має бути
"half" або "full" та визначає розмір у пів екрана, або у повний екран.
.PP
Після розміру панелі, ви маєте визначити кількість колонок у панелі.
Типове значення \- 1. Ви можете змінити кількість, вказавши цифру від 1 до 9
у стрічці формату.
.PP
Далі треба вказати назви полів (опціонально можна вказати розмір).
Список полів які ви можете використовувати:
.TP
.B name
віводить назву файлу.
.TP
.B size
виводить розмір файлу.
.TP
.B bsize
альтернативна форма для формату поля
.B size.
Для файлів виводе розмір файлів, для каталогів просто виводить
ПІД\-КАТ або НАД\-КАТ.
.TP
.B type
показує символ, якій відображає тип файлу. Символ подібний до того, що виводить команда
.I ls 
з параметром \-F флагом \-
.B *
для виконуваних файлів,
.B /
для каталогів,
.B @
для посилань,
.B =
для сокетів,
.B \-
для символних пристрієв,
.B +
для блокових пристрієв,
.B |
для каналів,
.B ~
для символічних посилань на каталогі, та
.B !
для недійсних посилань (посилань, які вказують в никуда).
.TP
.B mark
зірочка якщо файл помічено, порожнє якщо ні.
.TP
.B mtime
час останньої модифікації.
.TP
.B atime
час останнього доступу.
.TP
.B ctime
час зміни статусу файлу.
.TP
.B perm
відображає дозволи для файлу.
. a string representing the current permission bits of the file.
.TP
.B mode
вісімкове значення дозволів для файлу.
. an octal value with the current permission bits of the file.
.TP
.B nlink
кількість посилань на файл.
.TP
.B ngid
GID (числовий).
.TP
.B nuid
UID (числовий).
.TP
.B owner
власник файлу.
.TP
.B group
група файлу.
.TP
.B inode
inode файлу.
.PP
Також ви можете використовувати наступні вирази для визначення вигляду панелів:
.TP
.B space
пробіл у форматі.
.TP
.B |
виводить вертикальну риску.
.PP
Для виводи поля з фіксованим розміром, просто додайте
.B :
та розмір. Якщо за розміром стоіть символ
.BR + ,
це означає мінімальний розмір поля. Якщо буде потрібно, розмір поля збільшиться.
.PP
Наприклад, формат
.B Повний
відповідає наступному:
.PP
half type name | size | mtime
.PP
.B Розширений ,
наступному:
.PP
full perm space nlink space owner space group space size space mtime space name
.PP
Це формат визначений користувачем:
. This is a nice user display format:
.PP
half name | size:7 | type mode:3
.PP
Також, панелі можна встановити у наступні режими:
.TP
.B "Відомості (С\-x i)"
Виводить інформацію пов'язану із вибраним файлом та по можливості
інформацію про файлову систему.
.TP
.B "Дерево"
Цей режим подібний до
.\"LINK2"
дерева каталогів
.\"Directory Tree" .
Для більш детальної інформації дивись відповідний розділ.
.TP
.B "Швидкій перегляд (C\-x q)"
У цьому режимі панель переключається у режим обмеженого
.\"LINK2"
переглядача
.\"Internal File Viewer"
якій виводить вміст виділеного файлу. Якщо вибрати панель (клавішою 
.I Tab
або мишкою, ви отримаєте доступ до звичайних команд переглядача.
.\"NODE "    Sort Order..."
.SH "    Порядок сортування..."
Є дев'ять варіантів сортування: "Не сортувати", "За назвою", "Версія", "Розширення", "За розміром", 
"За часом модифікації", "За часом доступу", "За часом зміни", 
"За інформаційним вузлом". У діалогові сортування ви моєжете вибрати потрібний порядок, 
а також зазначити сортуваня у зворотньому порядку, регістрозалежне сортування, та можливість 
виводу виконуваних файлів першими, увімкнувші відповідні перемикачі.
.PP
За замовченням, каталогі виводяться у списку перед файлами, але це можна змінити у меню
.\"LINK2"
Параметри панелі
.\"Panel options"
(опція
.BR "Змішати всі файли" ).
.\"NODE "    Filter..."
.SH "    Фільтр..."
Фільтр дозволяє вказати патерн оболонкі (наприклад
.BR "*.tar.gz" )
, якому мають відповідати файли, щоб попасти у перелік.
.\"LINK2"
Поле вводу
.\"Input Line Keys"
дозволяє ввести патерн для файлів/каталогів, які буде відображено у панелі.
.PP
Якщо увімкнути перемикач
.I Тільки файли
, фільтр буде відбирати тільки з файли, а каталогі відображатимуться усі.
Інакше фільтруватимуться як файли так і каталогі. Коли увімкнений перемикач
.I Використання шаблону оболонкі
, для фільтру можна використовувати шаблони оболонкі (* визначає нуль або будь яку 
кількість любих символів та ? вищначає один буль якій символ). Інакше, для
виділення файлів можна використовувати звичайні регулярні вирази (дивись ed(1)).
Якщо увімкнений перемикач
.I Регістрозалежний
, фільтр буде реагувати на регістр символів. В іншому випадку регістр символів буде ігноруватися.
.\"NODE "    Reread"
.SH "    Пересканувати (C\-r)"
Ця команда перезавантажує список файлів у каталозі. Це дозволяє оновлювати інформацію, 
якщо якійсь інший процес може створювати, видаляти або модифікувати файли.
.\"NODE "  File Menu"
.SH "  Файл"
Midnight Commander використовує клавіши F1 \- F10 як скорочення для
команд, які знаходяться у меню
.I Файл .
У терміналах без підтримкі функціональних клавіш, можна отримати той самий
функціонал натиснувши Esc а потім цифру від 1 до 9 та 0 (відповідають клавішам F1 \- F10)
.PP
Меню Файл має наступні команди:
.PP
.B View (F3)
.PP
Перегляд виділеного файлу. Зазвичай, команда відкриває файл у
.\"LINK2"
вбудованому переглядачі,
.\"Internal File Viewer"
але, якщо опцію "вбудований переглядач" вимкнено, запускається зовнішній переглядач файлів
визначений змінною
.B VIEWER
Якщо змінну оточення
.B VIEWER
не визначено, використовується змінна
.B PAGER
Якщо змінна
.B PAGER
також не визначена, виконується команда "view". 
Якщо ви переглядаєте файл за допомогою S\-F3, переглядач відкрие файл без жодного форматування.
.P
Дивіться розділ
.\"LINK2"
налаштування зовнішнього переглядача
.\"Parameters for external editor or viewer"
щоб дізнатися як можна вказати розширені опції командного рядка для зовнішнього переглядача.
.PP
.B Фільтрований перегляд (Alt\-!)
.PP
Ця команда виводить вікно для введення команди оболонкі та її аргументів
(типовий аргумент \- ім'я виділеного файлу), вивід команди буде показано у вбудованомц переглядачі.
.PP
.B Редагувати (F4)
.PP
Натисніть F4 для редагування файлу з підсвіткою синтаксису. Натисніть S\-F4 для початку редагування нового, пустого файлу.
Наразі Midnight Commender відкриває файл у редакторі
.B vi
, або у редакторі, зазначеному у змінній оточення
.B EDITOR
, або використовується
.\"LINK2"
внутрішній редактор
.\"Internal File Editor"
якщо увімкнено опцію "вбудовений редактор".
.P
Дивіться розділ
.\"LINK2"
налаштування зовнішнього редактора
.\"Parameters for external editor or viewer"
щоб дізнатися як можна вказати розширені опції командного рядка для зовнішнього редактора.
.PP
.B Копіювати (F5, S\-F5)
.PP
Після натискання F5 відкриється діалог копіювання виділеного файлу (або помічених
файлів, якщо позначено хоча б один) у файл або каталог якій ви вкажете.
По замовченню, копіювання відбувається у каталог, зазначений у неактивній панелі.
Під час копіювання ви можете перервати процес, натиснувши C\-c або Esc.
Для детального розгляду шаблонів та можливих шаблонних символів у кінцевому файлі, дивись
.\"LINK2"
Шаблони копіювання/перейменування\&.
.\"Mask Copy/Rename"
.PP
S\-F5 схожа, але типово результат зберігається у активній панелі.
Ця команда завжди працює з виділеним файлом, не зважаючі на помічені файли.
.PP
На деякіх системах є можливість копіювати файли у фоновому режимі. Для
цього проібно клікнути мишкою на кнопці "На фоні", або натиснути Alt\-b.
.\"LINK2"
Фонові завдання
.\"Background jobs"
використовуються для контролю фонових процесів.
.PP
.B Посилання (C\-x l)
.PP
Створення жорсткого посилання на файл.
.PP
.B Абсолютне символічне посилання (C\-x s)
.PP
Створення абсолютного символічного посилання на файл.
.PP
.B Відносне символічне посилання (C\-x v)
.PP
Створення відносного символічного посилання на файл.
.PP
Для тих з вас хто не знає що таке посилання: створення посилання на файл (або каталог),
чимось схоже на копіювання файлу, але обидві назви файлів, початкова та кінцева, вказують
на один і той самий файл. Наприклад, якщо ви редагуєте файл по посиланню, зміни з'являться
у обох файлах. Деякі люди називають посилання ярликом.
.PP
Жорстке посилання погодиться як справжній файл. Після його створення, немоливо
точно вказати що є оригінальним файлом, а що посиланням. Якщо ви знищіте один з них,
другій залишиться неушкодженим. Дуже тяжко зрозуміти що представляє власне сам файл.
Файл буде існувати доки є хочаб одне посилання на нього.
.PP
Символічне посилання, це посилання на назву оригінального файлу. Якщо видалити оригінальний
файл, символічним посиланням неможливо буде скористатися. Досить легко визначити яка назва
представляє сам файл, а яка посилання на нього.  Midnight Commander показує
"@"\-знак попереду назви файлу, якщо це символічне посилання (за виключенням каталогів, посилання 
на каталог позначається тільдою (~)). Файл на якій вказує посилання можна побачити у стрічці міністатусу, якщо 
увімкнена опція
.I "Показувати міні\-статус"
.PP
Коли ви натискаєте "C\-x s" Midnight Commander автоматично запвнює повний шлях та назву 
оригінального файлу на відповідного посилання. Ви можете змінити їх.
.PP
Іноді вам стане в нагоді заміна абсолютного шляху у посиланнях на відносний.
Абсолютний шлях починається від кореню файлової системи:
.PP
.I /home/frodo/mc/mc \-> /home/frodo/new/mc
.PP
Відносне посилання вказує на оригінальний файл від каталогу, в якому знаходиться посилання:
.PP
.I /home/frodo/mc/mc \-> ../new/mc
.PP
Ви можете заставити Midnight Commander використовувати відносне посилання натиснувши
"C\-x v" замість "C\-x s".
.PP
.B Перемістити (F6, S\-F6)
.PP
Натисніть F6 для відкриття діалогу переміщення виділеного файлу (або позначених
файлів, якщо є позначені) до каталогу або нової назви, які ви вкажете.
По замовчанню, назва каталогу береться з неактивної панелі.
.PP
S\-F6 схожа, але використовує у якості каталогі призначення той самий, що і у вихідного файлу.
Ця комбінація завжди працює з позначеним файлом, навіть якщо є виділені.
.PP
.PP
.B СтвКат (F7)
.PP
Відкриває діалог та створює вказаний в ньому каталог. У якості назви за замовченням пропонується назва
позначеного файлу/каталогу.
.PP
.B Видалити (F8)
.PP
Видаляє виділений файл, або помічені файли у активній панелі. Під час видалення, можна натиснути
C\-c або Esc для переривання операції.
.PP
.B Швидка зміна каталогу (Alt\-c)
Use the
.\"LINK2"
quick cd
.\"Quick cd"
command if you have full command line and want to cd somewhere.
.PP
.B Select group (+)
.PP
This is used to select (tag) a group of files. Midnight Commander
will prompt for a selection options. When
.I Files only
checkbox is on, only files will be selected.  If
.I Files only
is off, as files as directories will be selected.
When
.I Shell Patterns
checkbox is on, the regular expression is much like the filename globbing
in the shell (* standing for zero or more characters and ?  standing
for one character). If
.I Shell Patterns
is off, then the tagging of files is done with normal regular
expressions (see ed (1)). When
.I Case sensitive
checkbox is on, the selection will be case sensitive characters.
If
.I Case sensitive
is off, the case will be ignored.
.PP
.B Unselect group (\\\\)
.PP
Used to unselect a group of files. This is the opposite of the
.I "Select group"
command.
.PP
.B Quit (F10, S\-F10)
.PP
Terminate Midnight Commander. S\-F10 is used when you want to
quit and you are using the shell wrapper.  S\-F10 will not take you
to the last directory you visited with Midnight Commander, instead
it will stay at the directory where you started Midnight Commander.
.\"NODE "    Quick cd"
.SH "    Quick cd"
This command is useful if you have a full command line and want to
.\"LINK2"
cd
.\"The cd internal command"
somewhere without having to yank and paste the command line. This command
pops up a small dialog, where you enter everything you would enter after
.B cd
on the command line and then you press enter. This features all the things
that are already in the
.\"LINK2"
internal cd command\&.
.\"The cd internal command"
.\"NODE "  Command Menu"
.SH "  Command Menu"
The
.\"LINK2"
Directory tree
.\"Directory Tree"
command shows a tree figure of the directories.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
"Find file"
.\"Find File"
command allows you to search for a specific file.
.PP
The "Swap panels" command swaps the contents of the two directory panels.
.PP
The "Switch panels on/off" command shows the output of the last shell command.
This works only on xterm and on Linux and FreeBSD console.
.PP
The "Compare directories" command compares the directory
panels with each other. You can then use the Copy (F5) command to make
the panels identical. There are three compare methods. The quick method
compares only file size and file date. The thorough method makes a
full byte\-by\-byte compare. The size\-only
compare method just compares the file sizes and does not check the
contents or the date times, it just checks the file size.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
"External panelize"
.\"External panelize"
allows you to execute an external program, and make the output of that
program the contents of the current panel.
.PP
The "Command history" command shows a list of typed commands. The
selected command is copied to the command line. The command history
can also be accessed by typing Alt\-p or Alt\-n.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
"Directory hotlist"
.\"Hotlist"
command makes changing of the current directory to often used directories
faster.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
"Screen list"
.\"Screen selector"
command shows a dialog window with the list of currently running
internal editors, viewers and other MC modules that support this mode.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
"Edit extension file"
.\"Edit Extension File"
command allows you to specify programs to executed when you try to
execute, view, edit and do a bunch of other thing on files
with certain extensions (filename endings).
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
"Edit Menu File"
.\"Edit Menu File"
command may be used for editing the user menu (which appears by
pressing F2).
.\"NODE "    Directory Tree"
.SH "    Directory Tree"
The Directory Tree command shows a tree figure of the directories. You
can select a directory from the figure and Midnight Commander will
change to that directory.
.PP
There are two ways to invoke the tree. The real directory tree command
is available from Commands menu. The other way is to select tree view
from the Left or Right menu.
.PP
To get rid of long delays, Midnight Commander creates the tree
figure by scanning only a small subset of all the directories. If the
directory which you want to see is missing, move to its parent
directory and press C\-r (or F2).
.PP
You can use the following keys:
.TP
.\"LINK2"
General movement keys
.\"General Movement Keys"
are accepted.
.TP
.B Enter.
In the directory tree, exits the directory tree and changes to this
directory in the current panel. In the tree view, changes to this
directory in the other panel and stays in tree view mode in the
current panel.
.TP
.B C\-r, F2 (Rescan).
Rescan this directory. Use this when the tree figure is out of date:
it is missing subdirectories or shows some subdirectories which don't
exist any more.
.TP
.B F3 (Forget).
Delete this directory from the tree figure. Use this to remove clutter
from the figure. If you want the directory back to the tree figure
press F2 in its parent directory.
.TP
.B F4 (Static/Dynamic).
Toggle between the dynamic navigation mode (default) and the static
navigation mode.
.PP
In the static navigation mode you can use the Up and Down keys to
select a directory. All known directories are shown.
.PP
In the dynamic navigation mode you can use the Up and Down keys to
select a sibling directory, the Left key to move to the parent
directory, and the Right key to move to a child directory. Only the
parent, sibling and children directories are shown, others are left
out. The tree figure changes dynamically as you traverse.
.TP
.B F5 (Copy).
Copy the directory.
.TP
.B F6 (RenMov).
Move the directory.
.TP
.B F7 (Mkdir).
Make a new directory below this directory.
.TP
.B F8 (Delete).
Delete this directory from the file system.
.TP
.B C\-s, Alt\-s.
Search the next directory matching the search string. If there is
no such directory these keys will move one line down.
.TP
.B C\-h, Backspace.
Delete the last character of the search string.
.TP
.B Any other character.
Add the character to the search string and move to the next directory
which starts with these characters. In the tree view you must first
activate the search mode by pressing C\-s. The search string is shown
in the mini status line.
.PP
The following actions are available only in the directory tree. They
aren't supported in the tree view.
.TP
.B F1 (Help).
Invoke the help viewer and show this section.
.TP
.B Esc, F10.
Exit the directory tree. Do not change the directory.
.PP
The mouse is supported. A double\-click behaves like Enter. See
also the section on
.\"LINK2"
mouse support\&.
.\"Mouse Support"
.\"NODE "    Find File"
.SH "    Find File"
The Find File feature first asks for the start directory for the
search and the filename to be searched for. By pressing the Tree
button you can select the start directory from the
.\"LINK2"
directory tree
.\"Directory Tree"
figure.
.PP
The "File name" input field contains a filename pattern to be searched
for. It is interpreted as a shell pattern or as a regular expression
depending on the state of the "Using shell patterns" checkbox. An empty
value is valid and matches any file name.
.PP
The "Content" input field contains a string to search for within the
files. Leave this field empty to disable searching file contents.
.PP
Option "Whole words" allows select only those files containing matches that
form whole words. Like grep \-w.
.PP
You can start the search by pressing the OK button.
During the search you can stop from the Stop button and continue from
the Start button.
.PP
You can browse the filelist with the up and down arrow keys. The Chdir
button will change to the directory of the currently selected
file. The Again button will ask for the parameters for a new
search. The Quit button quits the search operation. The Panelize
button will place the found files to the current directory panel so
that you can do additional operations on them (view, copy, move,
delete and so on). To return to the normal file listing, change directory
to "..".
.PP
The 'Enable ignore directories' checkbox and input field below it
allow one to set up the list of directories that should be skip during the search
files (for example, you may want to avoid searches on a CD\-ROM or on a NFS
directory that is mounted across a slow link). List components must be separated
with a colon, here is an example:
.PP
.nf
/cdrom:/nfs/wuarchive:/afs
.fi
.PP
Relative paths are supported also. The following example shows how to skip special
directories of version control systems:
.nf
/cdrom:/nfs/wuarchive:/afs:.svn:.git:CVS
.fi
.PP
Attention: input field can contain a dot (.), this means the current absolute path.
.PP
You may consider using the
.\"LINK2"
External panelize
.\"External panelize"
command for some operations. Find file command is for simple queries
only, while using External panelize you can do as mysterious searches
as you would like.
.\"NODE "    External panelize"
.SH "    External panelize"
The External panelize allows you to execute an external program, and
make the output of that program the contents of the current panel.
.PP
For example, if you want to manipulate in one of the panels all the
symbolic links in the current directory, you can use external
panelization to run the following command:
.PP
.nf
find . \-type l \-print
.fi
.PP
Upon command completion, the directory contents of the panel will no
longer be the directory listing of the current directory, but all the
files that are symbolic links.
.PP
If you want to panelize all of the files that have been downloaded
from your FTP server, you can use this awk command to extract the file
name from the transfer log files:
.PP
.nf
awk '$9 ~! /incoming/ { print $9 }' < /var/log/xferlog
.fi
.PP
You may want to save often used panelize commands under a descriptive name,
so that you can recall them quickly. You do this by typing the command on
the input line and pressing Add new button. Then you enter a name under
which you want the command to be saved. Next time, you just choose that
command from the list and do not have to type it again.
.\"NODE "    Hotlist"
.SH "    Hotlist"
The Directory hotlist command shows the labels of the directories
in the directory hotlist. Midnight Commander will change to the
directory corresponding to the selected label.  From the hotlist dialog,
you can remove already created label/directory pairs and add new ones.
To add new directories quickly, you can use the Add to hotlist command
(C\-x h), which adds the current directory into the directory hotlist,
asking just for the label for the directory.
.PP
This makes cd to often used directories faster. You may consider using the
CDPATH variable as described in
.\"LINK2"
internal cd command
.\"The cd internal command"
description.
.\"NODE "    Edit Extension File"
.SH "    Edit Extension File"
This will invoke your editor on the file
.IR ~/.config/mc/mc.ext.ini .
If this file does not exist and you are not root, it will be copied from
.IR /home/roman/out/etc/mc/mc.ext.ini .
If you are root, you can choose the file to edit: user's
.I ~/.config/mc/mc.ext.ini
or system\-wide
.IR /home/roman/out/etc/mc/mc.ext.ini .
The format of this file is described in detail in it.
.\"NODE "    Background jobs"
.SH "    Background Jobs"
This lets you control the state of any background Midnight Commander
process (only copy and move files operations can be done in the
background).  You can stop, restart and kill a background job from
here.
.\"NODE "    Edit Menu File"
.SH "    Edit Menu File"
The user menu is a menu of useful actions that can be customized by
the user. When you access the user menu, the
file .mc.menu from the current directory is used if it exists,
but only if it is owned by user or root and is not world\-writable.
If no such file found, ~/.config/mc/menu is tried in the same way,
and otherwise mc uses the default system\-wide menu
/home/roman/out/share/mc/mc.menu.
.PP
The format of the menu file is very simple. Lines that start with
anything but space or tab are considered entries for the menu (in
order to be able to use it like a hot key, the first character should
be a letter). All the lines that start with a space or a tab are the
commands that will be executed when the entry is selected.
.PP
When an option is selected all the command lines of the option are
copied to a temporary file in the temporary directory (usually
/usr/tmp) and then that file is executed. This allows the user to put
normal shell constructs in the menus. Also simple macro substitution
takes place before executing the menu code. For more information, see
.\"LINK2"
macro substitution\&.
.\"Macro Substitution"
.PP
Here is a sample mc.menu file:
.PP
.nf
A	Dump the currently selected file
	od \-c %f

B	Edit a bug report and send it to root
	I=`mktemp ${MC_TMPDIR:\-/tmp}/mail.XXXXXX` || exit 1
	vi $I
	mail \-s "Midnight Commander bug" root < $I
	rm \-f $I

M	Read mail
	emacs \-f rmail

N	Read Usenet news
	emacs \-f gnus

H	Call the info hypertext browser
	info

J	Copy current directory to other panel recursively
	tar cf \- . | (cd %D && tar xvpf \-)

K	Make a release of the current subdirectory
	echo \-n "Name of distribution file: "
	read tar
	ln \-s %d `dirname %d`/$tar
	cd ..
	tar cvhf ${tar}.tar $tar

= f *.tar.gz | f *.tgz & t n
X       Extract the contents of a compressed tar file
	tar xzvf %f
.fi
.PP
.B Default Conditions
.PP
Each menu entry may be preceded by a condition. The condition must
start from the first column with a '=' character. If the condition is
true, the menu entry will be the default entry.
.PP
.nf
Condition syntax: 	= <sub\-cond>
  or:			= <sub\-cond> | <sub\-cond> ...
  or:			= <sub\-cond> & <sub\-cond> ...

Sub\-condition is one of following:

  y <pattern>		syntax of current file matching pattern?
			(for edit menu only)
  f <pattern>		current file matching pattern?
  F <pattern>		other file matching pattern?
  d <pattern>		current directory matching pattern?
  D <pattern>		other directory matching pattern?
  t <type>		current file of type?
  T <type>		other file of type?
  x <filename>		is it executable filename?
  ! <sub\-cond>		negate the result of sub\-condition
.fi
.PP
Pattern is a normal shell pattern or a regular expression, according
to the shell patterns option. You can override the global value of
the shell patterns option by writing "shell_patterns=x" on the first
line of the menu file (where "x" is either 0 or 1).
.PP
Type is one or more of the following characters:
.PP
.nf
  n	not a directory
  r	regular file
  d	directory
  l	link
  c	character device
  b	block device
  f	FIFO (pipe)
  s	socket
  x	executable file
  t	tagged
.fi
.PP
For example 'rlf' means either regular file, link or fifo. The 't'
type is a little special because it acts on the panel instead of the
file. The condition '=t t' is true if there are tagged files in the
current panel and false if not.
.PP
If the condition starts with '=?' instead of '=' a debug trace will be
shown whenever the value of the condition is calculated.
.PP
The conditions are calculated from left to right. This means
.nf
	= f *.tar.gz | f *.tgz & t n
.fi
is calculated as
.nf
	( (f *.tar.gz) | (f *.tgz) ) & (t n)
.fi
.PP
Here is a sample of the use of conditions:
.PP
.nf
= f *.tar.gz | f *.tgz & t n
L	List the contents of a compressed tar\-archive
	gzip \-cd %f | tar xvf \-
.fi
.PP
.B Addition Conditions
.PP
If the condition begins with '+' (or '+?') instead of '=' (or '=?') it
is an addition condition. If the condition is true the menu entry will
be included in the menu. If the condition is false the menu entry will
not be included in the menu.
.PP
You can combine default and addition conditions by starting condition
with '+=' or '=+' (or '+=?' or '=+?' if you want debug trace). If you
want to use two different conditions, one for adding and another for
defaulting, you can precede a menu entry with two condition lines, one
starting with '+' and another starting with '='.
.PP
Comments are started with '#'. The additional comment lines must start
with '#', space or tab.
.\"NODE "  Options Menu"
.SH "  Options Menu"
Midnight Commander has some options that may be toggled on and
off in several dialogs which are accessible from this menu. Options
are enabled if they have an asterisk or "x" in front of them.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
Configuration
.\"Configuration"
command pops up a dialog from which you can change most of settings of
Midnight Commander.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
Layout
.\"Layout"
command pops up a dialog from which you specify a bunch of options how mc
looks like on the screen.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
Panel options
.\"Panel options"
command pops up a dialog from which you specify options of file manager panels.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
Confirmation
.\"Confirmation"
command pops up a dialog from which you specify which actions you want to
confirm.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
Appearance
.\"Appearance"
command pops up a dialog from which you specify the skin.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
Display bits
.\"Display bits"
command pops up a dialog from which you may select which characters is your
terminal able to display.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
Learn keys
.\"Learn keys"
command pops up a dialog from which you test some keys which are not working
on some terminals and you may fix them.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
Virtual FS
.\"Virtual FS"
command pops up a dialog from which you specify some VFS related options.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
Save setup
.\"Save Setup"
command saves the current settings of the Left, Right and Options
menus. A small number of other settings is saved, too.
.\"NODE "    Configuration"
.SH "    Configuration"
The options in this dialog are divided into several groups: "File
operation options", "Esc key mode", "Pause after run" and "Other options".
.PP
.B File operation options
.PP
.I Verbose operation.
This toggles whether the file Copy, Rename and Delete operations are
verbose (i.e., display a dialog box for each operation). If you have a
slow terminal, you may wish to disable the verbose operation. It is
automatically turned off if the speed of your terminal is less than
9600 bps.
.PP
.I Compute totals.
If this option is enabled, Midnight Commander computes total byte
sizes and total number of files prior to any Copy, Rename and Delete
operations. This will provide you with a more accurate progress bar
at the expense of some speed. This option has no effect, if
.I Verbose  operation
is disabled.
.PP
.I Classic progressbar.
If this option is enabled, the progressbar of Copy/Move/Delete operations
is always grown form left to right. If disabled, the growing direction
of progressbar follows to direction of Copy/Move/Delete operation:
from left panel to right one and vice versa. Enabled by default.
.PP
.I Mkdir autoname.
When you press F7 to create a new directory, the input line in popup dialog
will be filled by name of current file or directory in active panel.
Disabled by default.
.PP
.I Preallocate space.
Preallocate space for whole target file, if possible, before copy operation.
Disabled by default.
.PP
.B Esc key mode.
.PP
By default, Midnight Commander treats the Esc key as a key prefix.
Therefore, you should press Esc code twice to exit a dialog. But there is
a possibility to use a single press of Esc key for that action.
.PP
.I Single press.
By default this option is disabled. If you'll enable it, the Esc key
will act as a prefix key for set up time interval (see
.I Timeout
option below), and if no extra keys have arrived, then the Esc key
is interpreted as a cancel key (Esc Esc).
.PP
.I Timeout.
This options is used to setup the time interval (in microseconds)
for single press of Esc key. By default, this interval is one second
(1000000 microseconds). Also the timeout can be set via KEYBOARD_KEY_TIMEOUT_US
environment variable (also in microseconds), which has higher priority
than Timeout option value.
.PP
.B Pause after run
.PP
After executing your commands, Midnight Commander can pause, so
that you can examine the output of the command.  There are three
possible settings for this variable:
.PP
.I Never.
Means that you do not want to see the output of your command.  If you
are using the Linux or FreeBSD console or an xterm, you will be able to
see the output of the command by typing C\-o.
.PP
.I On dumb terminals.
You will get the pause message on terminals that are not capable of
showing the output of the last command executed (any terminal that is
not an xterm or the Linux console).
.PP
.I Always.
The program will pause after executing all of your commands.
.PP
.B Other options
.PP
.I Use internal editor.
If this option is enabled, the built\-in file editor is used to edit
files. If the option is disabled, the editor specified in the
.B EDITOR
environment variable is used.
If no editor is specified,
.B vi
is used.  See the section on the
.\"LINK2"
internal file editor\&.
.\"Internal File Editor"
.PP
.I Use internal viewer.
If this option is enabled, the built\-in file viewer is used to view
files. If the option is disabled, the pager specified in the
.B PAGER
environment variable is used.
If no pager is specified, the
.B view
command is used.  See the section on the
.\"LINK2"
internal file viewer\&.
.\"Internal File Viewer"
.PP
.I Ask new file name.
If this option is enabled, file name is asked before open new file in editor.
.PP
.I Auto menus.
If this option is enabled, the user menu will be invoked at startup.
Useful for building menus for non\-unixers.
.PP
.I Drop down menus.
When this option is enabled, the pull down menus will be activated as
soon as you press the F9 key. Otherwise, you will only get the menu title,
and you will have to activate the menu either with the arrow keys or with
the hotkeys. It is recommended if you are using hotkeys.
.PP
.I Shell Patterns.
By default the Select, Unselect and Filter commands will use shell\-like
regular expressions. The following conversions are performed to achieve
this: the '*' is replaced by '.*' (zero or more characters); the '?'
is replaced by '.' (exactly one character) and '.' by the literal
dot. If the option is disabled, then the regular expressions are the
ones described in ed(1).
.PP
.I Complete: show all.
By default, Midnight Commander pops up all possible
.\"LINK2"
completions
.\"Completion"
if the completion is ambiguous only when you press
.B Alt\-Tab
for the second time.  For the first time, it just completes as much as
possible and beeps in the case of ambiguity.  Enable this option if you
want to see all possible completions even after pressing
.B Alt\-Tab
the first time.
.PP
.I Rotating dash.
If this option is enabled, the
Midnight Commander shows a rotating dash in the upper right corner
as a work in progress indicator.
.PP
.I Cd follows links.
This option, if set, causes Midnight Commander to follow the
logical chain of directories when changing current directory
either in the panels, or using the cd command. This is the default
behavior of bash. When unset, Midnight Commander follows the
real directory structure, so cd .. if you've entered that directory
through a link will move you to the current directory's real parent
and not to the directory where the link was present.
.PP
.I Safe delete.
If this option is enabled, deleting files and directory hotlist entries
unintentionally becomes more difficult.  The default selection in the
confirmation dialogs for deletion changes from
.B Yes
to
.BR No .
This option is disabled by default.
.PP
.I Safe overwrite.
If this option is enabled, overwriting files unintentionally becomes
more difficult.  The default selection in the overwrite confirmation dialog
changes from
.B Yes
to
.BR No .
This option is disabled by default.
.PP
.I Auto save setup.
If this option is enabled, when you exit Midnight Commander, the
configurable options of Midnight Commander are saved in the
~/.config/mc/ini file.
.\"NODE "    Layout"
.SH "    Layout"
The layout dialog gives you a possibility to change the general layout
of screen. The options in this dialog are divided into several groups:
"Panel split", "Console output" and "Other options".
.PP
.B Panel split
.PP
The rest of the screen area is used for the two directory panels. You
can specify whether the area is split to the panels in
.I Vertical
or
.I Horizontal
direction. Panel layout can be changed using Alt\-, (Alt\-comma) shortcut.
.PP
.I Equal split.
By default, panels have equal sizes. Using this option you can specify
an unequal split.
.PP
.B Console output
.PP
On the Linux or FreeBSD console you can specify how many lines are shown
in the output window. This option is available if Midnight Commander runs
on native console only.
.PP
.B Other options
.PP
.I Menu bar visible.
If enabled, main menu of Midnight Commander is always visible on the top row
of screen above panels. Enabled by default.
.PP
.I Command prompt.
If enabled, command line is available. Enabled by default.
.PP
.I Keybar visible.
If enabled, 10 labels associated with F1\-F10 keys are located at the bottom
row of screen. Enabled by default.
.PP
.I Hintbar visible.
If enabled, the one\-line hints are visible below panels. Enabled by default.
.PP
.I XTerm window title.
When run in a terminal emulator for X11, Midnight Commander sets the
terminal window title to the current working directory and updates it
when necessary.  If your terminal emulator is broken and you see some
incorrect output on startup and directory change, turn off this option.
Enabled by default.
.PP
.I Show free space.
If enabled, free space and total space of current file system is shown
at the bottom frame of panel. Enabled by default.
.\"NODE "    Panel options"
.SH "    Panel options"
.B Main panel options
.PP
.I Show mini\-status.
If enabled, one line of status information about the currently selected item
is shown at the bottom of the panels. Enabled by default.
.PP
.I Use SI size units.
If this option is enabled, Midnight Commander will use SI prefixes (base 10)
when displaying any byte sizes. If disabled (default), Midnight Commander will
use IEC prefixes (base 2).
.PP
.I Mix all files.
If this option is enabled, all files and directories are shown mixed
together.  If the option is disabled (default), directories (and links to
directories) are shown at the beginning of the listing, and other files below.
.PP
.I Show backup files.
If enabled, Midnight Commander will show files ending with a tilde.
Otherwise, they won't be shown (like GNU's ls option \-B). Enabled by default.
.PP
.I Show hidden files.
If enabled, Midnight Commander will show all files that start with
a dot (like ls \-a). Disabled by default.
.PP
.I Fast directory reload.
If this option is enabled, Midnight Commander will use a trick to
determine if the directory contents have changed.  The trick is to reload
the directory only if the i\-node of the directory has changed; this means
that reloads only happen when files are created or deleted.  If what
changes is the i\-node for a file in the directory (file size changes,
mode or owner changes, etc) the display is not updated.  In these cases,
if you have the option on, you have to rescan the directory manually
(with C\-r). Disabled by default.
.PP
.I Mark moves down.
If enabled, the selection bar will move down when you mark a file (with
Insert key). Enabled by default.
.PP
.I Reverse files only.
Allow revert selection of files only. Enabled by default.
If enabled, the reverse selection is applied to files only, not to directories.
The selection of directories is untouched. If off, the reverse selection
is applied to files as well to directories: all unselected items become
selected, and vice versa.
.PP
.I Simple swap.
If both panels contain file listing, simple swap means that panels exchange
its screen positions: left panel become right one, and vice versa. If this
option is unchecked, file listing panels exchange its content keeping listing
format and sort options. Unchecked by default.
.PP
.I Auto save panels setup.
If this option is enabled, when you exit Midnight Commander, the
current settings of panels are saved in the ~/.config/mc/panels.ini file.
Disabled by default.
.PP
.B Navigation
.PP
.I Lynx\-like motion.
If this option is enabled, you may use the arrows keys to automatically
chdir if the current selection is a subdirectory and the shell command
line is empty. By default, this setting is off.
.PP
.I Page scrolling.
If set (the default), panel will scroll by half the display when the
cursor reaches the end or the beginning of the panel, otherwise it
will just scroll a file at a time.
.PP
.I Center scrolling.
If set, panel will scroll when the cursor reaches the middle of the
panel column, only hitting the top or bottom of the panel when actually on
the first or last file. This behavior applies when scrolling one file
at a time, and does not apply to the page up/down keys.
.PP
.I Mouse page scrolling.
Controls whenever scrolling with the mouse wheel is done by pages or
line by line on the panels.
.PP
.B File highlight
.PP
You can specify whether
.I permissions
and
.I file types
should be highlighted with distinctive
.\"LINK2"
Colors\&.
.\"Colors"
If the permission highlighting is enabled, the parts of the
.I perm
and
.I mode
.\"LINK2"
display fields
.\"Listing Format..."
which apply to the user running Midnight Commander are highlighted with
the color defined by the
.I selected
keyword.  If the file type highlighting is enabled, file names are colored
according to rules described in
/home/roman/out/etc/mc/filehighlight.ini
file. See
.\"LINK2"
Filenames Highlight
.\"Filenames Highlight"
for more info.
.PP
.B Quick search
.PP
You can specify how the
.\"LINK2"
Quick search
.\"Quick search"
mode should work: case insensitively, case sensitively or be matched
to the panel sort order: case sensitive or not.
.\"NODE "    Confirmation"
.SH "    Confirmation"
In this dialog you configure the confirmation options for file deletion,
overwriting files, execution by pressing enter, quitting the program,
directory hotlist entries deletion and history cleanup.
.\"NODE "    Appearance"
.SH "    Appearance"
In this dialog you can select the skin to be used and enable shadow
for dialogs and drop down menus.
.PP
See the
.\"LINK2"
Skins
.\"Skins"
section for technical details about the skin definition files.
.PP
.I Shadows.
If this option is enabled, all dialogs and drop down menus will have a shadow.
.\"NODE "    Display bits"
.SH "    Display bits"
This is used to configure the range of visible characters on the
screen.  This setting may be 7\-bits if your terminal/curses supports
only seven output bits, ISO\-8859\-1 displays all the characters in the
ISO\-8859\-1 map and full 8 bits is for those terminals that can display
full 8 bit characters.
.\"NODE "    Learn keys"
.SH "    Learn keys"
This dialog allows you to test and redefine functional keys, cursor
arrows and some other keys to make them work properly on your terminal.
They often don't, since many terminal databases are incomplete or broken.
.PP
You can move around with the Tab key and with the vi moving keys ('h'
left, 'j' down, 'k' up and 'l' right).  Once you press any cursor movement
key and it is recognized, you can use that key as well.
.PP
You can test keys just by pressing each of them.  When you press a
key and it is recognized properly, OK should appear next to the name
of that key.  Once a key is marked OK it starts working as usually,
e.g. F1 pressed the first time will just check that the F1 key works,
but after that it will show help.  The same applies to the arrow keys.
The Tab key should be working always.
.PP
If some keys do not work properly then you won't see OK appear after
pressing one of these.  Then you may want to redefine it.  Do it by pressing
the button with the name of that key (either by the mouse or by Enter
or Space after selecting the button with Tab or arrows).  Then a message
box will appear asking you to press that key.  Do it and wait until the
message box disappears.  If you want to abort, just press Escape once
and wait.
.PP
When you finish with all the keys, you can Save them.  The definitions
for the keys you have redefined will be written into the [terminal:TERM]
section of your ~/.config/mc/ini file (where TERM is the name of your current
terminal).  The definitions of the keys that were already working properly
are not saved.
.\"NODE "    Virtual FS"
.SH "    Virtual FS"
This option gives you control over the settings of the
.\"LINK2"
Virtual File System\&.
.\"Virtual File System"
.PP
Midnight Commander keeps in memory the information related to some
of the virtual file systems to speed up the access to the files in the
file system (for example, directory listings fetched from FTP servers).
.PP
Also, in order to access the contents of compressed files (for example,
compressed tar files), Midnight Commander needs to create temporary
uncompressed files on your disk.
.PP
Since both the information in memory and the temporary files on disk
take up resources, you may want to tune the parameters of the cached
information to decrease your resource usage or to maximize the speed of
access to frequently used file systems.
.PP
Because of the format of the tar archives, the
.I Tar filesystem
needs to read the whole file just to load the file entries.  Since most
tar files are usually kept compressed (plain tar files are species in
extinction), the tar file system has to uncompress the file on the disk
in a temporary location and then access the uncompressed file as a
regular tar file.
.PP
Now, since we all love to browse files and tar files all over the disk,
it's common that you will leave a tar file and then re\-enter it later.
Since decompression is slow, Midnight Commander will cache the
information in memory for a limited time.  When the timeout expires, all
the resources associated with the file system are released.  The default
timeout is set to one minute.
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
FTP File System
.\"FTP File System"
(ftpfs) allows you to browse directories on remote FTP servers.  It has
several options.
.PP
.I ftp anonymous password
is the password used when you login as "anonymous".  Some sites require
a valid e\-mail address.  On the other hand, you probably don't want to
give your real e\-mail address to untrusted sites, especially if you are
not using spam filtering.
.PP
ftpfs keeps the directory listing it fetches from a FTP server in a cache.
The cache expire time is configurable with the
.I ftpfs directory cache timeout
option.  A low value for this option may slow down every operation on
the ftpfs because every operation would require sending a request to the
FTP server.
.PP
You can define an FTP proxy host for doing FTP.  Note that most modern
firewalls are fully transparent at least for passive FTP (see below), so
FTP proxies are considered obsolete.
.PP
If
.I Always use ftp proxy
is not set, you can use the exclamation sign to enable proxy for certain
hosts.  See
.\"LINK2"
FTP File System
.\"FTP File System"
for examples.
.PP
If this option is set, the program will do two things: consult the
/home/roman/out/etc/mc/mc.no_proxy file for lines containing host names that
are local (if the host name starts with a dot, it is assumed to be a
domain) and to assume that any hostnames without dots in their names are
directly accessible.  All other hosts will be accessed through the
specified FTP proxy.
.PP
You can enable using
.I ~/.netrc
file, which keeps login names and passwords for ftp servers.  See netrc
(5) for the description of the .netrc format.
.PP
.I Use passive mode
enables using FTP passive mode, when the connection for data transfer is
initiated by the client, not by the server.  This option is recommended
and enabled by default.  If this option is turned off, the data
connection is initiated by the server.  This may not work with some
firewalls.
.\"NODE "    Save Setup"
.SH "    Save Setup"
At startup, Midnight Commander tries to load initialization information
from the ~/.config/mc/ini file.
If this file doesn't exist, the system\-wide file
.B /home/roman/out/etc/mc/mc.ini
is used. If this file doesn't exist, the system\-wide file
.B /home/roman/out/share/mc/mc.ini
is used. If this file doesn't exist, MC uses the default settings.
.PP
The
.I Save Setup
command creates the ~/.config/mc/ini file by saving the
current settings of the
.\"LINK2"
Left, Right
.\"Left and Right Menus"
and
.\"LINK2"
Options
.\"Options Menu"
menus.
.PP
If you activate the
.I auto save setup
option, MC will always save the current settings when exiting.
.PP
There also exist settings which can't be changed from the menus. To
change these settings you have to edit the setup file with your
favorite editor. See the section on
.\"LINK2"
Special Settings
.\"Special Settings"
for more information.
.SH ""
.\"NODE "Executing operating system commands"
.SH "Executing operating system commands"
You may execute commands by typing them directly in Midnight
Commander's input line, or by selecting the program you want to
execute with the selection bar in one of the panels and hitting Enter.
.PP
If you press Enter over a file that is not executable, Midnight
Commander checks the extension of the selected file against the
extensions in the
.\"LINK2"
Extensions File\&.
.\"Edit Extension File"
If a match is found then the code associated with that extension is
executed. A very simple
.\"LINK2"
macro expansion
.\"Macro Substitution"
takes place before executing the command.
.\"NODE "  The cd internal command"
.SH "  The cd internal command"
The
.I cd
command is interpreted by Midnight Commander, it is not passed to
the command shell for execution.  Thus it may not handle all of the
nice macro expansion and substitution that your shell does, although it
does some of them:
.PP
.I Tilde substitution.
The (~) will be substituted with your home directory, if you append a
username after the tilde, then it will be substituted with the login
directory of the specified user.
.PP
For example, ~guest is the home directory for the user guest, while
~/guest is the directory guest in your home directory.
.PP
.I Previous directory.
You can jump to the directory you were previously by using the special
directory name '\-' like this:
.B cd \-
.PP
.I CDPATH directories.
If the directory specified to the
.B cd
command is not in the current directory, then Midnight Commander
uses the value in the environment variable
.B CDPATH
to search for the directory in any of the named directories.
.PP
For example you could set your
.B CDPATH
variable to ~/src:/usr/src, allowing you to change your directory to
any of the directories inside the ~/src and /usr/src directories, from
any place in the file system by using its relative name (for example
cd linux could take you to /usr/src/linux).
.\"NODE "  Macro Substitution"
.SH "  Macro Substitution"
When accessing a
.\"LINK2"
user menu\&,
.\"Edit Menu File"
or executing an
.\"LINK2"
extension dependent command\&,
.\"Edit Extension File"
or running a command from the command line input, a simple macro
substitution takes place.
.PP
The macros are:
.TP
.I %i
The indent of blank space, equal the cursor column position.  For edit
menu only.
.TP
.I %y
The syntax type of current file. For edit menu only.
.TP
.I %k
The block file name.
.TP
.I %e
The error file name.
.TP
.I %m
The current menu name.
.TP
.IR %f " and " %p
In file manager user menu: the current file name in selected panel.
In mcedit user menu: the name of opened file.
.TP
.I %x
The extension of current file name.
.TP
.I %b
The current file name without extension.
.TP
.I %d
The current directory name.
.TP
.I %F
The current file in the unselected panel.
.TP
.I %D
The directory name of the unselected panel.
.TP
.I %t
The currently tagged files.
.TP
.I %T
The tagged files in the unselected panel.
.TP
.IR %u " and " %U
Similar to the %t and %T macros, but in addition the files are untagged.
You can use this macro only once per menu file entry or extension file
entry, because next time there will be no tagged files.
.TP
.IR %s " and " %S
The selected files: The tagged files if there are any. Otherwise the
current file.
.TP
.I %cd
This is a special macro that is used to change the current directory
to the directory specified in front of it.  This is used primarily as
an interface to the
.\"LINK2"
Virtual File System\&.
.\"Virtual File System"
.TP
.I %view
This macro is used to invoke the internal viewer.  This macro can be
used alone, or with arguments.  If you pass any arguments to this
macro, they should be enclosed in brackets.
.IP
The arguments are:
.I ascii
to force the viewer into ascii mode;
.I hex
to force the viewer into hex mode;
.I nroff
to tell the viewer that it should interpret the bold and underline
sequences of nroff;
.I unformatted
to tell the viewer to not interpret nroff commands for making the text
bold or underlined.
.TP
.I %%
The % character
.TP
.I %{some text}
Prompt for the substitution. An input box is shown and the text inside
the braces is used as a prompt. The macro is substituted by the text
typed by the user. The user can press Esc or F10 to cancel. This macro
doesn't work on the command line yet.
.TP
.I %var{ENV:default}
If environment variable
.I ENV
is unset, the
.I default
is substituted.  Otherwise, the value of
.I ENV
is substituted.
.\"NODE "  The subshell support"
.SH "  The subshell support"
The subshell support is a compile time option, that works with the
shells: bash, ash (BusyBox and Debian), (o/m)ksh, tcsh, zsh and fish.
.PP
When the subshell support is active, Midnight Commander will
spawn a concurrent copy of your shell (the one defined in the
.B SHELL
variable and if it is not defined, then the one in the /etc/passwd
file) and run it in a pseudo terminal, instead of invoking a new shell
each time you execute a command, the command will be passed to the
subshell as if you had typed it.  This also allows you to change the
environment variables, use shell functions and define aliases that are
valid until you quit Midnight Commander.
.PP
.B bash
users may specify startup commands in ~/.local/share/mc/bashrc (fallback ~/.bashrc)
and special keyboard maps in ~/.local/share/mc/inputrc (fallback ~/.inputrc).
.PP
.B ash/dash
users (BusyBox or Debian) may specify startup commands in ~/.local/share/mc/ashrc (fallback ~/.profile).
.PP
.B ksh/oksh
users (PD ksh variants) may specify startup commands in ~/.local/share/mc/kshrc
(fallback
.I ENV
or ~/.profile).
.PP
.B mksh
users (MirBSD ksh) may specify startup commands in ~/.local/share/mc/mkshrc
(fallback
.I ENV
or ~/.mkshrc).
.PP
.B zsh
users may specify startup commands in ~/.local/share/mc/.zshrc (fallback ~/.zshrc).
.PP
.B tcsh, fish
users cannot specify mc-specific startup commands at present. They have to rely on
shell-specific startup files.
.PP
The following paragraphs are relevant only when the subshell support is
active:
.PP
You can suspend applications at any
time with the sequence C\-o and jump back to Midnight Commander, if
you interrupt an application, you will not be able to run other
external commands until you quit the application you interrupted.
.PP
The basic prompt displayed by Midnight Commander is of the form
"user@host:current_path$ ". When using a capable shell, like Bash, the
prompt displayed by Midnight Commander will be the same prompt that you
are currently using in your shell.
.PP
(There's a known problem when using fish: the prompt is displayed only in
full screen mode (Ctrl-o), not when the panels are visible.)
.PP
The
.\"LINK2"
OPTIONS
.\"OPTIONS"
section has more information on how you can control subshell usage (-U/-u).
Furthermore, to set a specific subshell different from your current SHELL variable or
login shell defined in /etc/passwd, you may call MC like this:
.B SHELL=/bin/myshell mc
.\"NODE "Chmod"
.SH "Chmod"
The Chmod window is used to change the attribute bits in a group of
files and directories.  It can be invoked with the C\-x c key combination.
.PP
The Chmod window has two parts \-
.I Permissions
and
.IR File .
.PP
In the File section are displayed the name of the file or directory
and its permissions in octal form, as well as its owner and group.
.PP
In the Permissions section there is a set of check buttons which
correspond to the file attribute bits.  As you change the attribute
bits, you can see the octal value change in the File section.
.PP
To move between the widgets (buttons and check buttons) use the
.I arrow keys
or the
.I Tab
key.  To change the state of the check buttons or to select a button
use
.I Space.
You can also use the hotkeys on the buttons to quickly activate them.
Hotkeys are shown as highlighted letters on the buttons.
.PP
To set the attribute bits, use the Enter key.
.PP
When working with a group of files or directories, you just click on
the bits you want to set or clear.  Once you have selected the bits
you want to change, you select one of the action buttons (Set marked
or Clear marked).
.PP
Finally, to set the attributes exactly to those specified, you can use
the
.B [Set all]
button, which will act on all the tagged files.
.PP
.B [Marked all]
set only marked attributes to all selected files
.PP
.B [Set marked]
set marked bits in attributes of all selected files
.PP
.B [Clean marked]
clear marked bits in attributes of all selected files
.PP
.B [Set]
set the attributes of one file
.PP
.B [Cancel]
cancel the Chmod command
.\"NODE "Chown"
.SH "Chown"
The Chown command is used to change the owner/group of a file. The hot
key for this command is C\-x o.
.\"NODE "Advanced Chown"
.SH "Advanced Chown"
The Advanced Chown command is the
.\"LINK2"
Chmod
.\"Chmod"
and
.\"LINK2"
Chown
.\"Chown"
command combined into one window. You can change the permissions and
owner/group of files at once.
.\"NODE "Chattr"
.SH "Chattr"
The Chattr window is used to change the attributes of a group of files
and directories on a Linux file system. It can be invoked with the C\-x e
key combination.
.PP
Not all attributes are supported or utilized by all filesystems.
List of available attribute flags is represented as a set of check buttons
which correspond to the attribute flags (see
.B chattr(1)
for details). As you change the attribute flags, you can see the symbolic
value change below file name.
.PP
To move between the widgets (buttons and check buttons) use the
.I arrow keys
or the
.I Tab
key. To change the state of the check buttons or to select a button use
.BR Space .
.PP
To set the attributes, use the Enter key.
.PP
When working with a group of files or directories, you just click on
the flags you want to set or clear. Once you have selected the flags
you want to change, you select one of the action buttons (Set marked
or Clear marked).
.PP
Finally, to set the attributes exactly to those specified, you can use
the
.B [Set all]
button, which will act on all the tagged files.
.PP
.B [Marked all]
set only marked attributes to all selected files.
.PP
.B [Set marked]
set marked flags in attributes of all selected files.
.PP
.B [Clean marked]
clear marked flags in attributes of all selected files.
.PP
.B [Set]
set the attributes of one file.
.PP
.B [Cancel]
cancel the Chattr command.
.\"NODE "File Operations"
.SH "File Operations"
When you copy, move or delete files, Midnight Commander shows the
file operations dialog.  It shows the files currently being processed
and uses up to two progress bars.  The file bytes bar indicates the
percentage of the current file that has been processed so far.  The
total bytes bar indicates the percentage of the total size of the tagged
files that has been handled. Counters that show how many of the tagged
files have been handled are displayed. If the
.I Verbose
option is off, the file bytes bar and total bytes bar are not shown.
.PP
There are three buttons at the bottom of the dialog:
.TP
.B [Skip]
button to skip the rest of the current file.
.TP
.B [Suspend]
button to suspend the file operation and button transforms to the
.B [Continue]
one which continue the suspended operation.
.TP
.B [Abort]
button to abort the whole operation, the rest of the files are skipped.
.PP
There are three other dialogs which you can run into during the file
operations.
.PP
The error dialog informs about error conditions and has four choices:
.TP
.B [Ignore]
button to ignore this error.
.TP
.B [Ignore all]
button to ignore this and all future errors.
.TP
.B [Abort]
button to abort the operation altogether.
.TP
.B [Retry]
button to continue if you fixed the problem from another terminal.
.PP
The replace dialog is shown when you attempt to copy or move a file on
the top of an existing file.  The dialog shows the dates and sizes of
the both files. There are the following buttons in this dialog:
.TP
.B [Yes]
button to overwrite the file.
.TP
.B [No]
button to skip the file.
.TP
.B [Append]
button to append the source file to the target one.
.TP
.B [Reget]
button to append the rest of the source file to the target one.
This button is displayed only if the size of the target file
is non-zero and less than the size of the source file.
.TP
.B [All]
button to overwrite all the files.
.TP
.B [Older]
button to overwrite if the source file is newer than the target file.
.TP
.B [None]
button to never overwrite files
.TP
.B [Smaller]
button to overwrite if the source file size is less than the target one.
.TP
.B [Size differs]
button to overwrite files with different sizes.
.TP
.B [Abort]
button to abort the whole operation.
.PP
If the
.B Don't overwrite with zero length file
checkbox is on, the zero\-sized source files don't overwrite the
non\-zero\-sized target files.
.PP
The recursive delete dialog is shown when you try to delete a directory
which is not empty. There are the following buttons in this dialog:
.TP
.B [Yes]
button to delete the directory recursively.
.TP
.B [No]
button to skip the directory.
.TP
.B [All]
button to delete all the directories.
.TP
.B [None]
button to skip all the non\-empty directories.
.TP
.B [Abort]
button to abort the whole operation.
.PP
If you have tagged files and perform an operation on them only the files
on which the operation succeeded are untagged. Failed and skipped files
are left tagged.
.\"NODE "Mask Copy/Rename"
.SH "Mask Copy/Rename"
The copy/move operations let you translate the names of files in an
easy way.  To do it, you have to specify the correct source mask and
usually in the trailing part of the destination specify some wildcards.
All the files matching the source mask are copied/renamed according to
the target mask.  If there are tagged files, only the tagged files
matching the source mask are renamed.
.PP
There are other options which you can set:
.PP
.B Follow links
.PP
determines whether make the symlinks and hardlinks in the source
directory (recursively in subdirectories) new links in the target
directory or whether would you like to copy their content.
.PP
.B Dive into subdirs
.PP
determines the behavior when the source directory is about to be copied,
but the target directory already exists.  The default action is to copy
the contents of the source directory into the target directory.
Enabling this option causes copying the source directory itself into the
target directory.
.PP
For example, you want to copy directory
.I /foo
containing file
.I bar
to
.IR /bla/foo ,
which is an already existing directory.  Normally (when
.B Dive into subdirs
is not set), mc would copy file
.I /foo/bar
into the file
.IR /bla/foo/bar .
By enabling this option the
.I /bla/foo/foo
directory will be created, and
.I /foo/bar
will be copied into
.IR /bla/foo/foo/bar .
.PP
.B Preserve attributes
.PP
determines whether to preserve the permissions, timestamps and (if you
are root) the ownership of the original files.  If this option is not
set, the current value of the umask will be respected.
.PP
.B Use shell patterns
.PP
When this option is on you can use the '*' and '?' wildcards in the source
mask. They work like they do in the shell. In the target mask only the '*'
and '\\<digit>' wildcards are allowed. The first '*' wildcard in the target
mask corresponds to the first wildcard group in the source mask,
the second '*' corresponds to the second group and so on.  The '\\1' wildcard
corresponds to the first wildcard group in the source mask, the '\\2' wildcard
corresponds to the second group and so on all the way up to '\\9'.
The '\\0' wildcard is the whole filename of the source file.
.PP
Two examples:
.PP
If the source mask is "*.tar.gz", the destination is "/bla/*.tgz" and the
file to be copied is "foo.tar.gz", the copy will be "foo.tgz" in "/bla".
.PP
Suppose you want to swap basename and extension so that "file.c" would
become "c.file" and so on.  The source mask for this is "*.*" and the
destination is "\\2.\\1".
.PP
.B Use shell patterns off
.PP
When the shell patterns option is off the MC doesn't do automatic
grouping anymore. You must use '\\(...\\)' expressions in the source
mask to specify meaning for the wildcards in the target mask. This is
more flexible but also requires more typing. Otherwise target masks
are similar to the situation when the shell patterns option is on.
.PP
Two examples:
.PP
If the source mask is "^\\(.*\\)\\.tar\\.gz$", the destination is
"/bla/*.tgz" and the file to be copied is "foo.tar.gz", the copy
will be "/bla/foo.tgz".
.PP
Let's suppose you want to swap basename and extension so that "file.c"
will become "c.file" and so on. The source mask for this is
"^\\(.*\\)\\.\\(.*\\)$" and the destination is "\\2.\\1".
.PP
.B Case Conversions
.PP
You can also change the case of the filenames.  If you use '\\u'
or '\\l' in the target mask, the next character will be converted to
uppercase or lowercase correspondingly.
.PP
If you use '\\U' or '\\L' in the target mask, the next characters will
be converted to uppercase or lowercase correspondingly up to the
next '\\E' or next '\\U', '\\L' or the end of the file name.
.PP
The '\\u' and '\\l' are stronger than '\\U' and '\\L'.
.PP
For example, if the source mask is '*' (
.I Use shell patterns
on) or '^\\(.*\\)$' (
.I Use shell patterns
off) and the target mask is '\\L\\u*' the file names will be converted
to have initial upper case and otherwise lower case.
.PP
You can also use '\\' as a quote character. For example, '\\\\' is
a backslash and '\\*' is an asterisk.
.PP
.B Stable symlinks
.PP
commands Midnight Commander, that it should change symlinks in the target,
so that they'll point to the same location as it did before. With absolute
symbolic links this does nothing, but if you have a relative one, it will
recompute its value, adding necessary ../ and other directory parts and making
the value as short as possible (most modern filesystems keep short symlinks
inside inodes and thus don't waste much disk space).

.\"NODE "Select/Unselect Files"
.SH "Select/Unselect Files"
The dialog of group of files and directories selection or uselection.
The
.\"LINK2"
input line
.\"Input Line Keys"
allow enter the regular expression of filenames that will be
selected/unselected.
.PP
When
.I Files only
checkbox is on, only files will be selected.  If
.I Files only
is off, as files as directories will be selected.
When
.I Shell Patterns
checkbox is on, the regular expression is much like the filename globbing
in the shell (* standing for zero or more characters and ?  standing
for one character). If
.I Shell Patterns
is off, then the tagging of files is done with normal regular
expressions (see ed (1)). When
.I Case sensitive
checkbox is on, the selection will be case sensitive characters.
If
.I Case sensitive
is off, the case will be ignored.
.\"NODE "Diff Viewer"
.SH "Internal Diff Viewer"
The mcdiff is a visual diff tool. You can compare two files and edit them
in\-place (diffs are updated dynamically). You can browse and view a working
copy from popular version control systems (GIT, Subversion, etc).
.PP
Following shortcuts are available in internal diff viewer of Midnight
Commander.
.TP
.B F1
Invoke the built\-in hypertext help viewer.
.TP
.B F2
Save modified files.
.TP
.B F4
Edit file of the left panel in the internal editor.
.TP
.B F14
Edit file of the right panel in the internal editor.
.TP
.B F5
Merge the current hunk. Only the current hunk will be merged.
.TP
.B F7
Start search.
.TP
.B F17
Continue search.
.TP
.B F10, Esc, q
Exit from diff viewer.
.TP
.B Alt\-s, s
Toggle show of hunk status.
.TP
.B Alt\-n, l
Toggle show of line numbers.
.TP
.B f
Maximize left panel.
.TP
.B =
Make panels equal in width.
.TP
.B >
Reduce the size of the right panel.
.TP
.B <
Reduce the size of the left panel.
.TP
.B c
Toggle show of trailing carriage return (CR) symbol as ^M.
.TP
.B 2, 3, 4, 8
Set tabulation size
.TP
.B C\-u
Swap contents of diff panels.
.TP
.B C\-r
Refresh the screen.
.TP
.B C\-o
Switch to the subshell and show the command screen.
.TP
.B Enter, Space, n
Find next diff hunk.
.TP
.B Backspace, p
Find previous diff hunk.
.TP
.B g
Go to line.
.TP
.B Down
Scroll one line forward.
.TP
.B Up
Scroll one line backward.
.TP
.B PageUp
Move one page up.
.TP
.B PageDown
Moves one page down.
.TP
.B Home, A1
Moves to the line beginning.
.TP
.B End
Moves to the line end.
.TP
.B C\-Home
Move to the file beginning.
.TP
.B C\-End, C1
Move to the file end.
.\"NODE "Internal File Viewer"
.SH "Internal File Viewer"
The internal file viewer provides two display modes: ASCII and hex.
To toggle between modes, use the F4 key.
.PP
The viewer will try to use the best method provided by your system or
the file type to display the information.
Some character sequences, which appear most often in preformatted manual
pages, are displayed bold and underlined, thus making a pretty display
of your files.
.PP
When in hex mode, the search function accepts text in quotes and
constant numbers.  Text in quotes is matched exactly after removing
the quotes.  Each number matches one byte.  You can mix quoted text
with constants like this:
.PP
.nf
"String" 34 0xBB 012 "more text"
.fi
.PP
Numbers are always interpreted in hex. In the example above, "34" is
interpreted as 0x34. The prefix "0x" isn't really needed: we could type
"BB" instead of "0xBB". And "012" is interpreted as 0x12, not as an octal
number.
.PP
Here is a listing of the actions associated with each key that the
Midnight Commander handles in the internal file viewer.
.TP
.B F1
Invoke the built\-in hypertext help viewer.
.TP
.B F2
Toggle the wrap mode.
.TP
.B F4
Toggle the hex mode.
.TP
.B F5
Goto. You can specify a line number, offset or percentage of file size
of position that you want to view.
.TP
.B F7, /, ?
Start search. These keys call the dialog window that allows you to set up
the search options. If key is ? the "Backwards" option is on.
.TP
.B C\-s
Continue forward search.
.TP
.B C\-r
Continue reverse search.
.TP
.B F17, n
Continue search in the chosen direction.
.TP
.B N
Temporary change the search direction: backwards if forward search is chosen,
and vice versa.
.TP
.B F8
Toggle Raw/Parsed mode: This will show the file as found on disk or if
a processing filter has been specified in the mc.ext.ini file, then the
output from the filter. Current mode is always the other than written
on the button label, since on the button is the mode which you enter
by that key.
.TP
.B F9
Toggle the format/unformat mode: when format mode is on the viewer
will interpret some string sequences to show bold and underline with
different colors. Also, on button label is the other mode than current.
.TP
.B F10, Esc.
Exit the internal file viewer.
.TP
.B PageDown, space, C\-v.
Scroll one page forward.
.TP
.B PageUp, Alt\-v, C\-b, Backspace.
Scroll one page backward.
.TP
.B Down
Scroll one line forward.
.TP
.B Up
Scroll one line backward.
.TP
.B C\-l
Refresh the screen.
.TP
.B C\-o
Switch to the subshell and show the command screen.
.TP
.B "[n] m"
Set the mark n.
.TP
.B "[n] r"
Jump to the mark n.
.TP
.B C\-f
Jump to the next file.
.TP
.B C\-b
Jump to the previous file.
.TP
.B Alt\-r
Toggle the ruler.
.TP
.B Alt\-e
to change charset of displayed text may use Alt\-e (M\-e).
Recoding is made from selected codepage into system codepage. To
cancel the recoding you may select "<No translation>" in charset
selection dialog.
.PP
It's possible to instruct the file viewer how to display a file, look
at the
.\"LINK2"
Edit Extension File section
.\"Edit Extension File"

.\"NODE "Internal File Editor"
.SH "Internal File Editor"
The internal file editor is a full\-featured full screen editor.  It can
edit files up to 64 megabytes.  It is possible to edit binary files.
The internal file editor is invoked using
.B F4
if the
.I use_internal_edit
option is set in the initialization file.
.PP
The features it presently supports are: block copy, move, delete, cut,
paste; key for key undo; pull\-down menus; file insertion; macro
commands; regular expression search and replace; S\-arrow text highlighting
(if supported by the terminal); insert\-overwrite toggle; word wrap;
autoindent; tunable tab size; syntax highlighting for various file
types; and an option to pipe text blocks through shell commands like
indent and ispell.
.PP
Sections:
.IP
.\"LINK2"
Options of editor in ini\-file
.\"Internal File Editor / options"
.PP
The editor is very easy to use and requires no tutoring. To see what
keys do what, just consult the appropriate pull\-down menu. Other keys
are: Shift movement keys do text highlighting.
.B C\-Ins
copies to the file
.B mcedit.clip
and
.B S\-Ins
pastes from mcedit.clip.
.B S\-Del
cuts to
.BR mcedit.clip ,
and
.B C\-Del
deletes highlighted text. Mouse highlighting also works, and you
can override the mouse as usual by holding down the shift key
while dragging the mouse to let normal terminal mouse highlighting
work.
.PP
To define a macro, press
.B C\-R
and then type out the key
strokes you want to be executed. Press
.B C\-R
again when finished. You can then assign the macro to any key you
like by pressing that key. The macro is executed when you press
.B C\-A
and then the assigned key. The macro is also executed if
you press Meta, Ctrl, or Esc and the assigned key, provided that the
key is not used for any other function. Once defined, the macro
commands go into the file
.B ~/.local/share/mc/mcedit/mcedit.macros
You can delete a macro by deleting the
appropriate line in this file.
.PP
To change charset of displayed text may use Alt\-e (M\-e).
Recoding is made from selected codepage into system codepage. To
cancel the recoding you may select "<No translation>" in charset
selection dialog.
.PP
.B F19
will format the currently highlighted block (plain text or C or C++
code or another). This is controlled by the
file
.B /home/roman/out/share/mc/edit.indent.rc
which is copied to
.B ~/.local/share/mc/mcedit/edit.indent.rc
in your home directory the first time you use it.
.PP
The editor also displays non\-us characters (160+). When editing
binary files, you should set
.B display bits
to 7 bits in the options menu to keep the spacing clean.

.\"NODE "Internal File Editor / options"
.SH "Options of editor in ini\-file"

Some editor options of ini\-file are described in this section.
Options are placed in [Midnight\-Commander] section
.TP
.I editor_wordcompletion_collect_entire_file
Search autocomplete candidates in entire of file or just from
begin of file to cursor position (0)

.\"NODE "Screen selector"
.SH "Screen selector"
Midnight Commander supports running many internal modules (such as
editor, viewer and diff viewer) simultaneously and switching between
them without closing open files. Using several file managers at a time,
however, is not currently supported.
.PP
Let's call each of these modules a screen. There are three ways to
switch between screens, using one of these global shortcuts:
.TP
.B Alt\-}
switch to the next screen;
.TP
.B Alt\-{
switch to the previous screen;
.TP
.B Alt\-`
open a dialog window with the list of currently open screens (or use the
"Screen list" menu item).
.\"NODE "Completion"
.SH "Completion"
Let Midnight Commander type for you.
.PP
Attempt to perform completion on the text before current position.  MC
attempts completion treating the text as variable (if the text begins
with
.BR $ ),
username (if the text begins with
.BR ~ ),
hostname (if the text begins with
.BR @ )
or command (if you are on the command line in the position where you
might type a command, possible completions then include shell reserved
words and shell built\-in commands as well) in turn.  If none of these
matches, filename completion is attempted.
.PP
Filename, username, variable and hostname completion works on all input
lines, command completion is command line specific.  If the completion
is ambiguous (there are more different possibilities), MC beeps and the
following action depends on the setting of the
.\"LINK2"
Complete: show all
.\"Configuration"
option in the
.\"LINK2"
Configuration
.\"Configuration"
dialog.  If it is enabled, a list of all possibilities pops up next to
the current position and you can select with the arrow keys and
.B Enter
the correct entry.  You can also type the first letters in which the
possibilities differ to move to a subset of all possibilities and
complete as much as possible.  If you press
.B Alt\-Tab
again, only the subset will be shown in the listbox, otherwise the first
item which matches all the previous characters will be highlighted.  As
soon as there is no ambiguity, dialog disappears, but you can hide it by
canceling keys
.BR Esc ,
.B F10
and left and right arrow keys. If
.\"LINK2"
Complete: show all
.\"Configuration"
is disabled, the dialog pops up only if you press
.B Alt\-Tab
for the second time, for the first time MC just beeps.
.PP
Apply escaping of \fB?\fR, \fB*\fR, and \fB&\fR symbols (as \fB\\?\fR, \fB\\*\fR,
and \fB\\&\fR) in filenames to disallow use them as metasymbols in regular
expressions when substitution is performed in the input line.

.\"NODE "Virtual File System"
.SH "Virtual File System"
Midnight Commander is provided with a code layer to access the file
system; this code layer is known as the virtual file system switch.  The
virtual file system switch allows Midnight Commander to manipulate
files not located on the Unix file system.
.PP
Currently, Midnight Commander is packaged with some Virtual File
Systems (VFS): the
.I local
file system, used for accessing the regular Unix file system; the
.IR ftpfs ,
used to manipulate files on remote systems with the FTP protocol; the
.IR tarfs ,
used to manipulate tar and compressed tar files; the
.IR undelfs ,
used to recover deleted files on ext2 file systems (the default file
system for Linux systems),
.I shell
(for manipulating files over shell connections such as rsh and ssh).
If the code was compiled with
.I sftpfs
(for manipulating files over SFTP connections).
.PP
A generic
.I extfs
(EXTernal virtual File System) is provided in order to easily expand
VFS capabilities using scripts and external software.
.PP
The VFS switch code will interpret all of the path names used and will
forward them to the correct file system, the formats used for each one
of the file systems is described later in their own section.
.\"NODE "  FTP File System"
.SH "  FTP File System"
The FTP File System (ftpfs) allows you to manipulate files on remote
machines.  To actually use it, you can use the
.I FTP link
item in the menu or directly change your current directory using the
.I cd
command to a path name that looks like this:
.PP
.I ftp://[!][user[:pass]@]machine[:port]/[remote\-dir]
.PP
The
.IR user ,
.I port
and
.I remote\-dir
elements are optional.  If you specify the
.I user
element, Midnight Commander will login to the remote machine as that
user, otherwise it will use anonymous login or the login name from the
.I ~/.netrc
file.  The optional
.I pass
element is the password used for the connection.  Using the password in
the VFS directory name is not recommended, because it can appear on the
screen in clear text and can be saved to the directory history.
.PP
To enable using FTP proxy, prepend
.B !
(an exclamation sign) to the hostname.
.PP
Examples:
.PP
.nf
    ftp://ftp.nuclecu.unam.mx/linux/local
    ftp://tsx\-11.mit.edu/pub/linux/packages
    ftp://!behind.firewall.edu/pub
    ftp://guest@remote\-host.com:40/pub
    ftp://miguel:xxx@server/pub
.fi
.PP
Please check the
.\"LINK2"
Virtual File System
.\"Virtual FS"
dialog box for ftpfs options.
.\"NODE "  Tar File System"
.SH "  Tar File System"
The tar file system provides you with read\-only access to your tar
files and compressed tar files by using the chdir command.  To change
your directory to a tar file, you change your current directory to the
tar file by using the following syntax:
.PP
.I /filename.tar/utar://[dir\-inside\-tar]
.PP
The mc.ext.ini file already provides a shortcut for tar files, this means
that usually you just point to a tar file and press return to enter
into the tar file, see the
.\"LINK2"
Edit Extension File
.\"Edit Extension File"
section for details on how this is done.
.PP
Examples:
.PP
.nf
    mc\-3.0.tar.gz/utar://mc\-3.0/vfs
    /ftp/GCC/gcc\-2.7.0.tar/utar://
.fi
.PP
The latter specifies the full path of the tar archive.
.\"NODE "  FIle transfer over SHell filesystem"
.SH "  FIle transfer over SHell filesystem"
The shell file system is a network based file system that allows you to
manipulate the files in a remote machine as if they were local. To use
this, the other side has to have bash\-compatible shell.
.PP
To connect to a remote machine, you just need to chdir
into a special directory which name is in the following
format:
.PP
.I sh://[user@]machine[:options]/[remote\-dir]
.PP
The
.I user,
.I options
and
.I remote\-dir
elements are optional.  If you specify the
.I user
element, Midnight Commander will try to login on the remote
machine as that user, otherwise it will use your login name.
.PP
The available
.I options
are:
.nf
  'C' \- use compression;
  'r' \- use rsh instead of ssh;
  port \- specify the port used by remote server.
.fi
If the
.I remote\-dir
element is present, your current directory on the remote machine will be
set to this one.
.PP
Examples:
.PP
.nf
    sh://onlyrsh.mx:r/linux/local
    sh://joe@want.compression.edu:C/private
    sh://joe@noncompressed.ssh.edu/private
    sh://joe@somehost.ssh.edu:2222/private
.fi
.\"NODE "  SFTP (SSH File Transfer Protocol) filesystem"
.SH "  SFTP (SSH File Transfer Protocol) filesystem"
The SFTP file system is a network based file system that allows you to
manipulate the files in a remote machine as if they were local.
.PP
To connect to a remote machine, you just need to chdir
into a special directory which name is in the following
format:
.PP
.I sftp://[user@]machine:[port]/[remote\-dir]
.PP
The
.I user,
.I port
and
.I remote\-dir
elements are optional.  If you specify the
.I user
element, Midnight Commander will try to login on the remote
machine as that user, otherwise it will use your login name.
.I port
\- specify the port used by remote server (22 by default).
If the
.I remote\-dir
element is present, your current directory on the remote machine will be
set to this one.
.PP
Examples:
.PP
.nf
    sftp://onlyrsh.mx/linux/local
    sftp://joe:password@want.compression.edu/private
    sftp://joe@noncompressed.ssh.edu/private
    sftp://joe@somehost.ssh.edu:2222/private
.fi
.PP
When establishing the connection, server key fingerprint is verified using
the ~/.ssh/known_hosts file. If the host/key pair is not found or the host is found,
but the key doesn't match, an appropriate message is shown.
There are three buttons in the message dialog:
.PP
.B [Yes]
add new host/key pair to the ~/.ssh/known_hosts file and continue.
.PP
.B [Ignore]
do not add new host/key pair to the ~/.ssh/known_hosts file, but continue
nevertheless (at you own risk).
.PP
.B [No]
abort connection.
.\"NODE "  Undelete File System"
.SH "  Undelete File System"
On Linux systems, if you asked configure to use the ext2fs undelete
facilities, you will have the undelete file system available.
Recovery of deleted files is only available on ext2 file systems.  The
undelete file system is just an interface to the ext2fs library to
retrieve all of the deleted files names on an ext2fs and provides and
to extract the selected files into a regular partition.
.PP
To use this file system, you have to chdir into the special file name
formed by the "undel://" prefix and the file name where the actual
file system resides.
.PP
For example, to recover deleted files on the second partition of the
first SCSI disk on Linux, you would use the following path name:
.PP
.nf
    undel://sda2
.fi
.PP
It may take a while for the undelfs to load the required information
before you start browsing files there.
.\"NODE "  EXTernal File System"
.SH "  EXTernal File System"
.B extfs
allows you to integrate numerous features and file types into GNU Midnight
Commander in an easy way, by writing scripts.
.PP
Extfs filesystems can be divided into two categories:
.PP
1. Stand\-alone filesystems, which are not associated with any existing
file.  They represent certain system\-wide data as a directory tree.
You can invoke them by typing
.I "cd fsname://"
where fsname is an extfs short name (see below).  Examples of such
filesystems include audio (list audio tracks on the CD) or apt (list of
all Debian packages in the system).
.PP
For example, to list CD\-Audio tracks on your CD\-ROM drive, type
.PP
.nf
  cd audio://
.fi
.PP
2. 'Archive' filesystems (like rpm, patchfs and more), which represent
contents of a file as a directory tree.  It can consist of 'real' files
compressed in an archive (urar, rpm) or virtual files, like messages
in a mailbox (mailfs) or parts of a patch (patchfs).  To access such
filesystems
.I fsname://
should be appended to the archive name.  Note that the archive itself
can be on another vfs.
.PP
For example, to list contents of a zip archive documents.zip type
.PP
.nf
  cd documents.zip/uzip://
.fi
.PP
In many aspects, you could treat extfs like any other directory.  For
instance, you can add it to the hotlist or change to it from directory
history.  An important limitation is that you cannot invoke shell
commands inside extfs, just like any other non\-local VFS.
.PP
Common extfs scripts included with Midnight Commander are:
.TP
.B a
access 'A:' DOS/Windows diskette
.RI ( "cd a://" ).
.TP
.B apt
front end to Debian's APT package management system
.RI ( "cd apt://" ).
.TP
.B audio
audio CD ripping and playing
.RI ( "cd audio://"
or
.IR "cd device/audio://" ).
.TP
.B bpp
package of Bad Penguin GNU/Linux distribution
.RI ( "cd file.bpp/bpp://" ).
.TP
.B deb
package of Debian GNU/Linux distribution
.RI ( "cd file.deb/deb://" ).
.TP
.B dpkg
Debian GNU/Linux installed packages
.RI ( "cd deb://" ).
.TP
.B hp48
view and copy files to/from a HP48 calculator
.RI ( "cd hp48://" ).
.TP
.B lslR
browsing of lslR listings as found on many FTPs
.RI ( "cd filename/lslR://" ).
.TP
.B mailfs
mbox\-style mailbox files support
.RI ( "cd mailbox/mailfs://" ).
.TP
.B patchfs
extfs to handle unified and context diffs
.RI ( "cd filename/patchfs://" ).
.TP
.B rpm
RPM package
.RI ( "cd filename/rpm://" ).
.TP
.B rpms
RPM database management
.RI ( "cd rpms://" ).
.TP
.B ulha, urar, uzip, uzoo, uar, uha
archivers
.RI ( "cd archive/xxxx://"
where xxxx is one of:
.IR ulha ,
.IR urar ,
.IR uzip ,
.IR uzoo ,
.IR uar ,
.IR uha ).
.PP
You could bind file type/extension to specified extfs as described in the
.\"LINK2"
Edit Extension File
.\"Edit Extension File"
section.  Here is an example entry for Debian packages:
.PP
.nf
  regex/\.deb$
          Open=%cd %p/deb://
.fi
.\"NODE "Colors"
.SH "Colors"
Midnight Commander will try to detect if your terminal supports
color using the terminal database and your terminal name.  Sometimes
it gets confused, so you may force color mode or disable color mode
using the \-c and \-b flag respectively.
.PP
If the program is compiled with the S\-Lang screen manager instead of
ncurses, it will also check the variable
.B COLORTERM,
if it is set, it has the same effect as the \-c flag.
.PP
You may specify terminals that always force color mode
by adding the
.I color_terminals
variable to the Colors section of the initialization file.  This will
prevent Midnight Commander from trying to detect if your terminal
supports color.  Example:
.PP
.nf
[Colors]
color_terminals=linux,xterm
color_terminals=terminal\-name1,terminal\-name2...
.fi
.PP
The program can be compiled with both ncurses and S\-Lang, ncurses does
not provide a way to force color mode: ncurses uses just the
information in the terminal database.
.PP
Midnight Commander provides a way to change the default colors.
Currently the colors are configured using the environment variable
.B MC_COLOR_TABLE
or the Colors section in the initialization file.
.PP
In the Colors section, the default color map is loaded from the
.I base_color
variable.  You can specify an alternate color map for a terminal by
using the terminal name as the key in this section.  Example:
.PP
.nf
[Colors]
base_color=
xterm=menu=magenta:marked=,magenta:markselect=,red
.fi
.PP
The format for the color definition is:
.PP
.nf
  <keyword>=<fgcolor>,<bgcolor>,<attributes>:<keyword>=...
.fi
.PP
The colors are optional, and the keywords are: normal, selected, disabled, marked,
markselect, errors, input, inputmark, inputunchanged, commandlinemark,
reverse, gauge, header, inputhistory, commandhistory. Button bar colors are:
bbarhotkey, bbarbutton. Status bar color: statusbar. Menu colors are: menunormal,
menusel, menuhot, menuhotsel, menuinactive. Dialog colors are: dnormal, dfocus,
dhotnormal, dhotfocus, dtitle. Error dialog colors are: errdfocus, errdhotnormal,
errdhotfocus, errdtitle.  Help colors are: helpnormal, helpitalic, helpbold,
helplink, helpslink, helptitle.  Viewer colors are: viewnormal, viewbold,
viewunderline, viewselected. Editor colors are: editnormal, editbold, editmarked,
editwhitespace, editnonprintable, editlinestate. Popup menu colors are: pmenunormal,
pmenusel, pmenutitle.
.PP
.I header
determines the color of panel header, the line that contains column titles
and sort mode indicator.
.PP
.I input
determines the color of input lines used in query dialogs.
.PP
.I gauge
determines the color of the filled part of the progress bar (gauge),
which is used to show the user the progress of file operations, such as
copying.
.PP
.I disabled
determines the color of the widget that cannot be selected.
.PP
The dialog boxes use the following colors:
.I dnormal
is used for the normal text,
.I dfocus
is the color used for the currently selected component,
.I dhotnormal
is the color used to differentiate the hotkey color in normal
components, whereas the
.I dhotfocus
color is used for the highlighted color in the currently selected
component.
.PP
Menus use the same scheme but uses the menunormal, menusel, menuhot, menuhotsel
and menuinactive tags instead.
.PP
Help uses the following colors:
.I helpnormal
is used for normal text,
.I helpitalic
is used for text which is emphasized in italic in the manual page,
.I helpbold
is used for text which is emphasized in bold in the manual page,
.I helplink
is used for not selected hyperlinks and
.I helpslink
is used for selected hyperlink.
.PP
Popup menu uses following colors:
.I pmenunormal
is used for non\-selected menu items and as a main color of popup menu window,
.I pmenusel
is used for selected menu item,
.I pmenutitle
is used for popup menu title.
.PP
The possible colors are: black, gray, red, brightred, green,
brightgreen, brown, yellow, blue, brightblue, magenta, brightmagenta,
cyan, brightcyan, lightgray and white. And there is a special keyword
for transparent background. It is 'default'. The 'default' can only be
used for background color. Another special keyword "base" means mc's main
colors.  When 256 colors are available, they can be specified either as
color16 to color255, or as rgb000 to rgb555 and gray0 to gray23. Example:
.PP
.nf
[Colors]
base_color=normal=white,default:marked=magenta,default
.fi
.PP
Attributes can be any of bold, italic, underline, reverse and blink, appended by a
plus sign if more than one are desired.  The special word "none" means no
attributes, without attempting to fall back to base_color.  Example:
.PP
.nf
menuhotsel=yellow;black;bold+underline
.fi

.\"NODE "Skins"
.SH "Skins"
You can change the appearance of Midnight Commander.
To do this, you must specify a file that contain descriptions of colors
and lines to draw boxes. Redefining of the colors is entirely compatible
with the assignment of colors, as described in Section
.\"LINK2"
Colors\&.
.\"Colors"
.PP
If your skin contains any true\-color definitions, you should define
the 'truecolors' key set to TRUE value in [skin] section. If true\-color
is not used but 256\-color is, you should define '256colors' instead.
.PP
A skin\-file is searched on the following algorithm (to the first one found):
.IP
.br
1) command line option
.B \-S <skin>
or
.B \-\-skin=<skin>
.br
2) Environment variable
.B MC_SKIN
.br
3) Parameter
.B skin
in section
.B [Midnight\-Commander]
in config file.
.br
4) File
.B /home/roman/out/etc/mc/skins/default.ini
.br
5) File
.B /home/roman/out/share/mc/skins/default.ini

.PP
Command line option, environment variable and parameter in config file may
contain the absolute path to the skin\-file (with the extension \.ini
or without it). Search of skin\-file will occur in (to the first one found):
.IP
1)
.B ~/.local/share/mc/skins/
.br
2)
.B /home/roman/out/etc/mc/skins/
.br
3)
.B /home/roman/out/share/mc/skins/
.br

.PP
For getting extended info, refer to:
.IP
.\"LINK2"
Description of section and parameters
.\"Skins sections"
.br
.\"LINK2"
Color pair definitions
.\"Skins colors"
.br
.\"LINK2"
Color and attribute aliases
.\"Skins aliases"
.br
.\"LINK2"
Draw lines
.\"Skins lines"
.br
.\"LINK2"
Compatibility
.\"Skins oldcolors"
.br

.\"NODE "  Skins sections"
.SH "  Description of section and parameters"

Section
.B [skin]
contain metainfo for skin\-file. Parameter
.I description
contain short text about skin.

.PP
Section
.B [filehighlight]
contain descriptions of color pairs for filenames highlighting.
Name of parameters must be equal to names of sections into
filehighlight.ini file.
See
.\"LINK2"
Filenames Highlight
.\"Filenames Highlight"
for getting more info.

.PP
Section
.B [core]
describes the elements that are used everywhere.
.TP
.I _default_
Default color pair. Used in all other sections if they not contain
color definitions
.TP
.I selected
cursor
.TP
.I marked
selected data
.TP
.I markselect
cursor on selected data
.TP
.I gauge
color of the filled part of the progress bar
.TP
.I input
color of input lines used in query dialogs
.TP
.I inputmark
color of input selected text
.TP
.I inputunchanged
color of input text before first modification or cursor movement
.TP
.I commandlinemark
color of selected text in command line
.TP
.I reverse
reverse color
.PP
Section
.B [dialog]
describes the elements that are placed on dialog windows (except error dialogs).
.TP
.I _default_
Default color for this section. Used [core]._default_ if not specified
.TP
.I dfocus
Color of active element (in focus)
.TP
.I dhotnormal
Color of hotkeys
.TP
.I dhotfocus
Color of hotkeys in focused element

.PP
Section
.B [error]
describes the elements that are placed on error dialog windows
.TP
.I _default_
Default color for this section. Used [core]._default_ if not specified
.TP
.I errdhotnormal
Color of hotkeys
.TP
.I errdhotfocus
Color of hotkeys in focused element

.PP
Section
.B [menu]
describes the elements that are placed in menu. This section describes
system menu (called by F9) and user\-defined menus (called by F2 in panels
and by F11 in editor).
.TP
.I _default_
Default color for this section. Used [core]._default_ if not specified
.TP
.I entry
Color of menu items
.TP
.I menuhot
Color of menu hotkeys
.TP
.I menusel
Color of active menu item (in focus)
.TP
.I menuhotsel
Color of menu hotkeys in focused menu item
.TP
.I menuinactive
Color of inactive menu

.PP
Section
.B [help]
describes the elements that are placed on help window.
.TP
.I _default_
Default color for this section. Used [core]._default_ if not specified
.TP
.I helpitalic
Color pair for element with
.B italic
attribute
.TP
.I helpbold
Color pair for element with
.B bold
attribute
.TP
.I helplink
Color of links
.TP
.I helpslink
Color of active link (on focus)

.PP
Section
.B [editor]
describes the colors of elements placed in editor.
.TP
.I _default_
Default color for this section. Used [core]._default_ if not specified
.TP
.I editbold
Color pair for element with
.B bold
attribute
.TP
.I editmarked
Color of selected text
.TP
.I editwhitespace
Color of tabs and trailing spaces highlighting
.TP
.I editlinestate
Color for line state area

.PP
Section
.B [viewer]
describes the colors of elements placed in viewer.
.TP
.I viewunderline
Color pair for element with
.B underline
attribute

.\"NODE "  Skins colors"
.SH "  Color pair definitions"
Any parameter in skin\-file contain definition of color pair.
.PP
Color pairs described as two colors and the optional attributes
separated by ';'. First field sets the foreground color, second
field sets background color, third field sets the attributes.
Any of the fields may be omitted, in this case value will be
taken from default color pair (global color pair or from default
color pair of this section).
.PP
Example:
.br
.nf
[core]
    # green on black
    _default_=green;black
    # green (default) on blue
    selected=;blue
    # yellow on black (default)
    # underlined yellow on black (default)
    marked=yellow;;underline
.fi

.PP
Possible colors (names) and attributes are described in
.\"LINK2"
Colors\&.
.\"Colors"
section.

.\"NODE "  Skins aliases"
.SH "  Color and attribute aliases"
This optional section might define aliases for single colors (not color pairs)
as well as combination of attributes; in other words, for semicolon\-separated
fragments of parameters. Aliases can refer to other aliases as long as they
don't form a loop.
.PP
Example:
.br
.nf
[aliases]
    myfavfg=green
    myfavbg=black
    myfavattr=bold+italic
[core]
    _default_=myfavfg;myfavbg;myfavattr
.fi

.\"NODE "  Skins lines"
.SH "  Draw lines"
Lines sets in section
.B [Lines]
into skin\-file. By default single lines are used, but you may redefine
to usage of any utf\-8 symbols (like to lines, for example).
.PP
.I WARNING!!!
When you build Midnight Commander with the ncurses screen library
usage of drawing lines is limited!
Possible only drawing a single lines.
For all questions and comments please contact the developers of ncurses.

.PP
Descriptions of parameters
.BR [Lines] :
.TP
.I lefttop
left\-top line fragment.
.TP
.I righttop
right\-top line fragment.
.TP
.I centertop
down branch of horizontal line
.TP
.I centerbottom
up branch of horizontal line
.TP
.I leftbottom
left\-bottom line fragment
.TP
.I rightbottom
right\-bottom line fragment
.TP
.I leftmiddle
right branch of vertical line
.TP
.I rightmiddle
left branch of vertical line
.TP
.I centermiddle
cross of lines
.TP
.I horiz
horizontal line
.TP
.I vert
vertical line
.TP
.I thinhoriz
thin horizontal line
.TP
.I thinvert
thin vertical line


.\"NODE "  Skins oldcolors"
.SH "  Compatibility"

Appointment of color  by skin\-files fully compatible with
the appointment of the colors described in
.\"LINK2"
Colors\&.
.\"Colors"
section.
.PP
In this case, reassignment of colors has priority over the skin file and is
complementary.

.\"NODE "Filenames Highlight"
.SH "Filenames Highlight"
Section [filehighlight] in current skin\-file contains key names as
highlight groups and values as color pairs. Color pairs is documented
in
.\"LINK2"
Skins
.\"Skins"
section.
.PP
Rules of filenames highlight are placed in /home/roman/out/share/mc/filehighlight.ini file
(~/.config/mc/filehighlight.ini).
Name of section in this file must be equal to parameters names in
[filehighlight] section (in current skin\-file).
.PP
Keys in these groups are:
.TP
.I type
file type. If present, all other options are ignored.
.TP
.I regexp
regular expression. If present, 'extensions' option is ignored.
.TP
.I extensions
list of extensions of files. Separated by ';' sign.
.TP
.I extensions_case
(make sense only with 'extensions' parameter) make 'extensions'
rule case sensitive (true) or not (false).
.PP
`type' key may have values:
.nf
\- FILE (all files)
  \- FILE_EXE
\- DIR (all directories)
  \- LINK_DIR
\- LINK (all links except stale link)
  \- HARDLINK
  \- SYMLINK
\- STALE_LINK
\- DEVICE (all device files)
  \- DEVICE_BLOCK
  \- DEVICE_CHAR
\- SPECIAL (all special files)
  \- SPECIAL_SOCKET
  \- SPECIAL_FIFO
  \- SPECIAL_DOOR
.fi
.PP

.\"NODE "Special Settings"
.SH "Special Settings"
Most of Midnight Commander settings can be changed from the
menus. However, there are a small number of settings which can only be
changed by editing the setup file.
.PP
These variables may be set in your ~/.config/mc/ini file:
.TP
.I clear_before_exec
By default, Midnight Commander clears the screen before executing a
command.  If you would prefer to see the output of the command at the
bottom of the screen, edit your ~/.config/mc/ini file and change the value of
the field clear_before_exec to 0.
.TP
.I confirm_view_dir
If you press F3 on a directory, normally MC enters that directory.  If
this flag is set to 1, then MC will ask for confirmation before changing
the directory if you have files tagged.
.TP
.I ftpfs_retry_seconds
This value is the number of seconds Midnight Commander will wait
before attempting to reconnect to an FTP server that has denied the
login.  If the value is zero, the login will no be retried.
.TP
.I max_dirt_limit
Specifies how many screen updates can be skipped at most in the internal
file viewer.  Normally this value is not significant, because the code
automatically adjusts the number of updates to skip according to the
rate of incoming keystrokes.  However, on very slow machines or
terminals with a fast keyboard auto repeat, a big value can make screen
updates too jumpy.
.IP
It seems that setting max_dirt_limit to 10 causes the best behavior,
and that is the default value.
.TP
.I mouse_move_pages_viewer
Controls if scrolling with the mouse is done by pages or line by line
on the internal file viewer.
.TP
.I only_leading_plus_minus
Allow special treatment for '+', '\-', '*' in the command line (select,
unselect, reverse selection) only if the command line is empty.  You
don't need to quote those characters in the middle of the command line.
On the other hand, you cannot use them to change selection when the
command line is not empty.
.TP
.I alternate_plus_minus
If true, use '+', '\-', '\\' and '*' keys normally. For select/unselect,
use 'Alt\-+', 'Alt\--' and 'Alt\-*'.
.TP
.I show_output_starts_shell
This variable only works if you are not using the subshell support.
When you use the C\-o keystroke to go back to the user screen, if this
one is set, you will get a fresh shell.  Otherwise, pressing any key
will bring you back to Midnight Commander.
.TP
.I timeformat_recent
Change the time format used to display dates less than 6 months from
now.
See strftime or date man page for the format specification. If this
option is absent, default timeformat is used.
.TP
.I timeformat_old
Change the time format used to display  dates older than 6 months from
now or for dates in the future.
See strftime or date man page for the format specification. If this
option is absent, default timeformat is used.
.TP
.I torben_fj_mode
If this flag is set, then the home and end keys will work slightly
different on the panels, instead of moving the selection to the first
and last files in the panels, they will act as follows:
.IP
The home key will: Go up to the middle line, if below it; else go to the
top line unless it is already on the top line, in this case it will go
to the first file in the panel.
.IP
The end key has a similar behavior: Go down to the middle line, if over
it; else go to the bottom line unless you already are at the bottom
line, in such case it will move the selection to the last file name in
the panel.
.TP
.I use_file_to_guess_type
If this variable is on (the default) it will spawn the file command to
match the file types listed on the
.\"LINK2"
mc.ext.ini file\&.
.\"Edit Extension File"
.TP
.I xtree_mode
If this variable is on (default is off) when you browse the file system
on a Tree panel, it will automatically reload the other panel with the
contents of the selected directory.
.TP
.I shell_directory_timeout
This variable holds the lifetime of a directory cache entry in seconds. The
default value is 900 seconds.
.TP
.I clipboard_store
This variable contains path (with options) to the external clipboard
utility like 'xclip' to read text into X selection from file.
For example:
.PP
.nf
clipboard_store=xclip \-i
.fi
.TP
.I clipboard_paste
This variable contains path (with options) to the external clipboard
utility like 'xclip' to print the selection to standard out.
For example:
.PP
.nf
clipboard_paste=xclip \-o
.fi
.TP
.I autodetect_codeset
This option allows use the `enca' command to autodetect codeset of text files
in internal viewer and editor. List of valid values can be obtain by the
`enca \-\-list languages | cut \-d : \-f1' command. Option must be located
in the [Misc] section.
.PP
For example:
.PP
.nf
autodetect_codeset=ukrainian
.fi
.\"NODE "Parameters for external editor or viewer"
.SH "Parameters for external editor or viewer"
Midnight Commander provides a way for specify an options for external editors
and viewers. Midnight Commander tries to search the
"[External editor or viewer parameters]" section in the system initialization file
(the mc.lib file located in Midnight Commander's library directory)
and then in the ~/.config/mc/ini file. The option name should be equal to the name
(full pathname) of external editor or viewer. The option value can contain following
variables:
.TP
.I %filename
The filename to edit/view.
.TP
.I %lineno
The start line in the opening file.
.PP
For example:
.PP
.nf
[External editor or viewer parameters]
    vi=%filename +%lineno
    joe=%filename +%lineno
    more=%filename +%lineno
.fi
.PP
Start line is passed to the external editor/viewer only if it is called from the
.\"LINK2"
Find file
.\"Find File"
results window.
.PP
If external editor/viewer is launched via F4/F3 keys, MC hopes that program
(at least "joe", but probably others too) has an own feature that by default
opens the file where it was last open. MC doesn't prevent external editor/viewer
to save and restore position in opened files.
.\"NODE "Terminal databases"
.SH "Terminal databases"
Midnight Commander provides a way to fix your system terminal
database without requiring root privileges. Midnight Commander
searches in the system initialization file (the mc.lib file located in
Midnight Commander's library directory) and in the 
~/.config/mc/ini file for the section 
"terminal:your\-terminal\-name" and then for the section
"terminal:general", each line of the section contains a key symbol that
you want to define, followed by an equal sign and the definition for the
key.  You can use the special \\e form to represent the escape character
and the ^x to represent the control\-x character.
.PP
The possible key symbols are:
.PP
.nf
f0 to f20     Function keys f0\-f20
bs            backspace
home          home key
end           end key
up            up arrow key
down          down arrow key
left          left arrow key
right         right arrow key
pgdn          page down key
pgup          page up key
insert        the insert character
delete        the delete character
complete      to do completion
.fi
.PP
For example, to define the key insert to be the Escape + [ + O + p, you
set this in the ini file:
.PP
.nf
insert=\\e[Op
.fi

.PP
Also now you can use
.I extended learn keys.
For example:

.nf
    ctrl\-alt\-right=\\e[[1;6C
    ctrl\-alt\-left=\\e[[1;6D
.fi

.PP
This means that ctrl+alt+left sends a \\e[[1;6D escape sequence
and therefore Midnight Commander interprets "\\e[[1;6D" as C\-Alt\-Left.

.PP
The
.I complete
key symbol represents the escape sequences used to invoke the completion
process, this is invoked with Alt\-tab, but you can define other keys to do
the same work (on those keyboard with tons of nice and unused keys
everywhere).
.SH ""
.\"NODE "FILES"
.SH "FILES"
Full paths below may vary between installations.  They are also affected
by the
.B MC_DATADIR
environment variable. If it's set, its value is used instead of
/home/roman/out/share/mc in the paths below.
.PP
.I /home/roman/out/share/mc/help/mc.hlp
.IP
The help file for the program.
.PP
.I /home/roman/out/share/mc/mc.ext.ini
.IP
The default system\-wide extensions file.
.PP
.I ~/.config/mc/mc.ext.ini
.IP
User's own extension, view configuration and edit configuration
file.  They override the contents of the system wide files if present.
.PP
.I /home/roman/out/etc/mc/mc.ini
.RE
.I /home/roman/out/share/mc/mc.ini
.IP
System\-wide setup files for Midnight Commander, used only if the user
doesn't have his own
.B ~/.config/mc/ini
file. If /home/roman/out/etc/mc/mc.ini exists, /home/roman/out/share/mc/mc.ini isn't used.
.PP
.I /home/roman/out/share/mc/mc.lib
.IP
Global settings for Midnight Commander. Settings in this file
affect all users, whether they have ~/.config/mc/ini or not.  Currently, only
.\"LINK2"
terminal settings
.\"Terminal databases"
are loaded from mc.lib.
.PP
.I ~/.config/mc/ini
.IP
User's own setup. If this file is present then the setup is loaded
from here instead of the system\-wide startup file.
.PP
.I /home/roman/out/share/mc/hints/mc.hint
.IP
This file contains the hints displayed by the program.
.PP
.I /home/roman/out/share/mc/mc.menu
.IP
This file contains the default system\-wide applications menu.
.PP
.I ~/.config/mc/menu
.IP
User's own application menu. If this file is present it is used instead
of the system\-wide applications menu.
.PP
.I ~/.cache/mc/Tree
.IP
The directory list for the directory tree and tree view features.
.PP
.I ~/.local/share/mc.menu
.IP
Local user\-defined menu. If this file is present, it is used instead of
the home or system\-wide applications menu.
.PP
To change default root directory of MC, you can use
.B MC_PROFILE_ROOT
environment variable. The value of MC_PROFILE_ROOT must be an absolute path.
If MC_PROFILE_ROOT is unset or empty, HOME variable is used. If HOME is unset
or empty, MC directories are get from GLib library.
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH "LICENSE"
This program is distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public
License as published by the Free Software Foundation. See the built\-in
help for details on the License and the lack of warranty.
.\"NODE "AVAILABILITY"
.SH "AVAILABILITY"
The latest version of this program can be found at
http://ftp.midnight\-commander.org/.
.\"NODE "SEE ALSO"
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ed(1), gpm(1), terminfo(1), view(1), sh(1), bash(1),
tcsh(1), zsh(1).
.PP
.nf
Midnight Commander's page on the World Wide Web:
	https://www.midnight\-commander.org/
.fi
.\"NODE "AUTHORS"
.SH "AUTHORS"
Authors and contributors are listed in the AUTHORS file in the source
distribution.
.\"NODE "BUGS"
.SH "BUGS"
See the file TODO in the distribution for information on what remains to
be done.
.PP
If you want to report a problem with the program, please create bugreport
at https://www.midnight\-commander.org/.
.PP
Provide a detailed description of the bug, the version of the program
you are running
.RI ( "mc \-V"
displays this information), the operating system you are running the
program on.  If the program crashes, we would appreciate a stack trace.
